Andy Williams Jr.
Link: https://vimeo.com/856632146
===

[00:00:00] The challenges that I would say I'm facing is getting access to More legal advocates like counselors, legal counsel because one thing that I, I do is I'm an advocate and I use litigation that has already successfully, won.

[00:00:15] Like if there's a a suit, a claim that's been filed that's already been won in California. Well, the same issue is going on in. Michigan, the same issue is going on in Ohio, whatever, and why we can't take that model and just duplicate it. And so what, what I have the barrier is, is saying, well, the ACLU already won in these states.

[00:00:37] Let's copy that model over here. Same pleading, same everything. And so that access to those, attorneys that's the, the biggest barrier that I have. And the, I think I would say another barrier is the fees that are being charged to people that are incarcerated or facing incarceration. They're astronomical.

[00:00:56] If you don't have, and I say this respectfully, but if you don't have the OJ defense money, you kind of screw it. And I say that respectfully, 'cause I'm not talking to the merits of the case. I'm just talking about being charged with murder. And you don't, you don't have access to that, that dream team.

[00:01:10] And that is the biggest barrier. And even saying that there's a case NAACP v Button, that was probably a 1960 case . That said regular people can help other people with the law or their litigation without being charged with unauthorized practice of law if it's part of the organization's mission and goal.

[00:01:34] And so that is beautiful for me. And then the second thing is there was a case out of New York that challenge the unauthorized practice of law to help New York New York ends whatever with debt collection and stuff and they prevailed.

[00:01:51] And the attorney general is appealing it right now. But with those two scenarios, for me, 'cause I like, think solution oriented, I'll be filing a claim against the state of Illinois and the United States challenging the unauthorized practice of law. Because I'm a, I would consider myself a legal scholar.

[00:02:09] I don't know if I say a legal scholar. I'm more of a, a scholar when it comes to people's rights. That's what I am. And we have a big campaign going on with our Prison Lives Matter group. 'cause that's why I'm a part of a state rep for Illinois Prison Lives Matter. But I sit on the lawful committee for the National Prison Lives Matter, and we're on a campaign to abolish legalized slavery.

[00:02:31] What legalized slavery is, 'cause we don't really grasp that, is when 30 Democrats and 17 Republicans vote on something that infringes upon our right. So if, if you label me a felon, And the Constitution or the Second Amendment says, I have the right to bear arms and you pass legislation that says, 'cause I'm a felon, I don't have the right to bear arms.

[00:02:57] That's legalized slavery and it's unconstitutional. Most people wouldn't see it that way because they don't know. And I am the protector of the people's rights. And so I know that's not talking about a barrier 'cause I'm really always thinking about the solution. 


[00:03:13] Marker
---

[00:03:13] And if we got rid of. What I consider victimless crimes, like possession of drugs or things. , it's two things. When I look about drug possession, one, you're criminalizing a status. 'cause there's people in jail for being addicts and so you're criminalizing their status.

[00:03:29] Like, that's like somebody getting. Has a disease, cancer and then you gotta lock 'em up 'cause they got cancer. No, there's a disease. I'm, I'm in an addiction and alcoholism, you're locking people up for being drunk when they really should be going to the Betty Ford Center or which we don't have 'em in the communities.

[00:03:46] But somewhere where we're like, why are you drinking and driving? you could kill a life. Let me help you and befriend you and offer the services


[00:03:56] Marker
---

[00:03:56] If we get rid of, just say for instance, repeal, the the Controlled Substance Act, re repeal that dealing with marijuana but if you took that away, Then where would the judges police officers and the money that came through the 1994 crime bill to build more institutions, where would they get their jobs from?

[00:04:16] So this is like a billion dollar industry that it's legalized slavery. That's just what it is, and we're on a campaign to abolish that. 


[00:04:24] Marker
---

[00:04:24] In prison in 1991.

[00:04:26] And so what is that, 20 years ago or something? It definitely was a different environment of where it is now. , when I got out of prison and finally was done with my incarceration. 'cause when I got out, I went right back after three months for selling drugs. But I beat that case in a bench trial.

[00:04:41] I was in a period that the whole pipeline to prison wasn't so magnified as it is today. So a lot of the barriers today that are faced.

[00:04:52] I didn't face him. And by the time, if I even would've faced him, I was already like the local poster child. the guy who arrested me on my drug case wound up becoming the chief of police. And then I sat on a board with him. I was in the church. So, like the community I think as a whole really embraced me and just how I grew up.

[00:05:14] Although there were still some officers that, It's whatever. 


[00:05:17] Marker
---

[00:05:17] I am like a, a national modern day abolitionist. I hear the stories from all over the states.

[00:05:23] So in some states it may be, Kind of like it was in the nineties for me, but the majority of the stories I'm hearing are, are horrific. I got a text today from Indiana. They already had terrible drinking water and now they got, the toilet's been backed up since Thursday. I. And the cell is full of feces and stuff.

[00:05:42] And like the text is like, well, who do I, who, who do I go to? Andy. And then the food that they serve . And the women's, that's a whole nother thing, just about their rights being violated. And again, I wanna know women prison, so I can't speak to that, but my sister Hollywood, who. Been out since 2017.

[00:06:00] She can, and we had a panel yesterday and she spoke to that, the, the, the women's, the just one, the disrespect, the, the, the lack of access to tampons to write stuff. It's just horrific. And that ta takes me back to what I call legalized slavery. This is, this is, it's terrible. You keep somebody in solitary confinement for years.

[00:06:23] What, what is this inhumane colonialism mindset? That's just, and, and I, when I, when I say that, it's because if we look at the history of United States, what was it before the United States? It was Turtle Island. So some, the back then with the Great Britain, they conquered the people. I believe that conquering mindset is still what exists that's been going on for generation to generation, and they just legitimize it by voting on it, saying We're gonna enter public safety when there's a portion of it.

[00:06:55] I do believe in the public safety, but I also believe in a lot of the, the current system of legislation is the criminals. And then partially, I don't even think they realize that's what they're doing. 'cause you're born into it. So it's just the mindset, it's the mentality. No difference. When the person gets outta jail and is trying to get a job and it's not working, he goes back to sell drugs.

[00:07:18] He ain't doing it 'cause he want to, he tried to do something different, but this is what works. And that's why I think, with the current legislation, police departments or whatever, what's going on as bogus. You making 70, $80,000 a year, and you're not gonna jeopardize that because you don't see another opportunity for you that exists.

[00:07:34] So, but the prison conditions that I. I'll always go back to it. It's like modern day slavery and it's hell. 


[00:07:42] Marker 
---

[00:07:42] legislation and enforcing the rights as a people. in 2021, the United States was found guilty for crimes against humanity, police killings, mass incarceration.

[00:07:54] Begins to dismantle the profit margin because when the, the same thing that happened in that tribunal. With that guilty verdict is the same thing that's happening across each city. So what we're able to do is attack that 

[00:08:10] The similar, the correlation between the black codes, the slave codes, the Jim Crow, the 1994 crime bill, the gang legislation, the habitual criminal, the enhancement, like all of this is designed based on that 13th amendment being passed to where we're at today, and that guilty verdict with the tribunal.

[00:08:31] As we begin to educate the allies, the activists, the attorneys the modern day abolitionists, I call 'em all part of the A team 'cause I'm Andy. But when we get those, and the ambassadors and bring them together and what I say is a teach in and they get educated and implement within the next, I would easily say 7 to 10 years, we would easily be able to flip the script because some of these this generation is dying off.

[00:08:56] It's just the truth. Like you're, you're. They're not there. And if we begin to teach without thinking we need to go to Harvard, we just need to get on a webinar panel, zoom call with a pen and paper and say, this is what happened over here. This is what happened over there. This brother got off on parole because they said you could not show he was a threat to society and you've been denying him due process and infringing upon his liberty.

[00:09:21] So now we got a whole bunch of educated people that are saying, wait, the judicial system. We hired you. You didn't, you didn't hire us, we hired you. And your role is to be a neutral arbitrator. And so when they don't do that, then we file a claim against their surety bonds and then they're no longer insured and we'll begin to see the change.

[00:09:41] That's what I believe, and I'm optimistic, hopeful, got a lot of faith. ' cause I just believe it. I don't believe we're gonna be here like this in this position for the rest of our life and it's taken a generation. To rise up. That's not coming at it from a, a, just a physical war, but more of a spiritual, and I'm not talking about the spiritual religion.

[00:10:00] I'm talking about the spirit of that, that was put in place many years ago and we like, that's bull crap. That that No, no, no, no, no, no. We're not doing that. And I think that's where it comes in. And the way I utilize it and, and in this, Battle we have is more of through a love concept. Like this is the love evolution, and I'm gonna, it's difficult, but I try to just give the people the benefit of the doubt and say, you don't know what you're doing.

[00:10:25] I, I try to live it that way and take the time to educate. I've had one, some successes. 

[00:10:31] Because if you can read, which I'm, I'm an avid reader, so I, I self-taught myself through this, law stuff. So I think again, for the majority of the people, I try to say, you really don't know you're doing the job, but if you're like some of these progressive district attorneys I think it's your governor out there in California, that max it out after 15 years, see these people with a, with a different opportunity That I believe is kinda like modeled after the Norway prison.

[00:10:57] we can, we can do it. when, when I look at Norway and what happened with North Dakota, they, they model Norway's prison and some of their guards or correctional officers, like, we not buying for this. And they quit. Bye. so these are the stories I think that could get out and people could start seeing it.

[00:11:15] I have a sheriff in my home county,. Sheriff Ron Hane He really turned to jail into a restorative justice place like literally. I mean, brothers that was locked up with him went to his wedding, be at his house in his kitchen, like for real, like he's. he's, he's, and again, I'm not saying he's the perfect sheriff, but I'm saying it's a, it's perfect for the season we're in right now.

[00:11:36] And I appreciate, him and I can call him up on a cell phone, like, Hey, he just, it's a different brand. He's not the only sheriff. I know there's other sheriffs around, too. So when we begin to, from a movement standpoint, as us as advocate, activists and abolitionists begin to highlight those that are being progressive and doing what is common law, what is right to treat people like people without dehumanizing them. We'll see the shift and that's why I say, within the next seven years I think we can see a, a big shift that, that that would happen. Yeah. 


[00:12:08] Marker
---

[00:12:08] I think if, if we, the people truly understood the difference between a republic form of government and a democracy, we would realize the republic form of government is what we're self-governing.

[00:12:20] And I think you need the democracy in the sense when the republic form of government. Gets too big for its britches, then the majority can say, no, no, no, no, no. This is what, our rights are. So I'm not diminishing that. But you can't have a democracy think they can vote away your rights 'cause they're the majority.

[00:12:38] We, the people are the majority. And when we say it about the, the people and, and last thing I'll say is one of the most inspiring advocates in the sixties movement was Fred Hampton Sr. Because he said, you don't fight racism with racism, you fight it with solidarity.

[00:12:56] And he brought these young patriots that had the Dixie flag from the south to the table with the Panthers, with the young Lords and that rainbow coalition. Before Jesse Jackson was a rainbow coalition, is what I strive to see. And I know we can do that because that's what happened in 2020 social unrest with, the murder of George Floyd.

[00:13:18] So when we take that, put it together with an educational tool and education means, I'm gonna share with you the information. You're not gonna reject it until you assess it. 'cause you just throw something out there. Ah, no. Hear it, hear it. Then I think we get to that seven year goal that I see happening.

[00:13:38] the police officer that's pulling you over wants to go home, just like the person in the car wants to go home. So how do we say we both can go home? 


[00:13:46] Marker
---

