Angela Davenport
Link: https://vimeo.com/851935302
===

[00:00:00] . Hi, my name is Angela Davenport and I provide communication support for Voting Access for All Coalition.

[00:00:08] We are a nonprofit in Michigan that helps to ensure that people who are formerly incarcerated and justice involved know that they can vote. 

[00:00:17] Well, I will say that my own personal challenges when I came back to Michigan, I was I've experienced, I've had my own experience of being incarcerated. It was a, a limited amount of time. But when I came home, I had never been through this process. I'd never been through an arrest or. What it meant to be stripped, searched, or what it meant to be thrown in a cell.

[00:00:49] And this was a whole new experience. So when I came back to Michigan and even just talking about it, I get really emotional. It was terrible. So I think one of the things. That I'm sure I still need, even though I have definitely put my life back together. I need like to heal mentally and emotionally.

[00:01:11] And I think like if I went through that, I can't imagine the amount of of other people that need healing in that way too. And so I don't know that. That has been as readily accessible as it it should be. So I've been fortunate. My mom, she dropped everything to come help support me, bring me home.

[00:01:34] But there's so many people that don't have that. I'm lucky. I'm fortunate and I know that so when I came back to Michigan, my whole focus changed. And so that's when I. Started working with people who were also justice involved to say, how could we make things better? What do we do to write to make things better for people who are reentering the community?


[00:02:00] Marker
---

[00:02:00] Because one day you're gonna get out. That's the hope, right? Is that either you're gonna stay incarcerated or you're gonna get out. It's one or the other. And so if you're gonna get out, How do we make it a easier transition? And so one of the things that I think is lacking aside from mental support is housing and and also employment.

[00:02:25] So when I say that, I mean there are companies that we know we work with that will hire people. How do we get more companies involved in that and wanting to support, because it doesn't just help the person that's formerly incarcerated, like it will help. Make a more viable economy economic mobility for everyone in our community.

[00:02:50] So how do we bring jobs and housing? And it seems like a very broad topic, but it's one of the things that I've been working heavily on. And so to that end, we do have something called the Michigan Fair Chance Access to Housing Act. That would help prevent some of these barriers of the background check that you have to check when you're applying for housing.


[00:03:14] Marker
---

[00:03:14] That was one of my fears was how do I ever go back to work? Who's gonna hire me?

[00:03:19] I was thought like, oh my God, I have a master's, but that doesn't mean anything if you have this on your record, because what company is gonna take a chance on me? And so I just feel fortunate that although that happened in my life, it's brought me to where I am now. But not everybody has that. 


[00:03:40] Marker
---

[00:03:40] The Michigan Fair Chance access to Housing Acts. Right now it is in the house. So it's in the legislative process. I'm working with a group called Nation Outside and who's working with Rep Aiyash he's the one that introduced the legislation and it has.

[00:03:59] 20 co-sponsors. So we're working together with the community to organize what's called Capital Day for Housing, not Hurdles is what we're calling it. This would ensure that these barriers, because so many times I can't tell you the number of times I've heard people.

[00:04:17] Talk about living on the sofa of a friend or family member. They find housing, but then they're, once the landlord finds out that there's a criminal record involved, either they don't get it, or the other one that I see a lot is they increase the security deposit. So that's one of the big issues is that if you don't, if they find out you have a criminal record then you're either told no or you're given the options.

[00:04:47] You, hey, you can pay double sometimes three months in advance for the security deposit. And I mean when I say I hear this, these are people that are working like steadily going to school. They are trying to better themselves and their families, and I. 


[00:05:07] Marker
---

[00:05:07] Then I also hear stories because one of the things I do by providing communication support is I do interviews with people.

[00:05:14] So, so sometimes like this, but so some of the stories I hear are that, , 10, 15 years ago, I, I had this criminal conviction, but I still can't get housing right now. So I. That is, and it's like this should not be a defacto life sentence. ? Once you've served your time, you've served it. So what, what are we really getting by continually to, to continuing to punish people.


[00:05:45] Marker
---

[00:05:45] I know that there are there are programs like in Genesee County centered around housing where they are specifically working with landlords. I don't have the specific details of that, but I know that there are programs that I would say, look up Flint. And Sheriff Chris, Chris Swanson who I know has been integral into helping people who are formerly incarcerated find safe, stable, and secure housing.


[00:06:15] Marker
---

[00:06:15] Aside from, I know housing is a big issue there's also voting. I also work with Voting Access for All Coalition VAC for short. And the main issue that we have found is that there's so many people. With a criminal record or just justice involved who think that they can't vote, they see or hear what's happening in Florida about some of the fines and fees or people voting and then later being fined or, or persecuted because of it And because of that, We found that there are people who are just hesitant to just, and they just say, what?

[00:06:57] I don't believe in voting, so it's not even worth it to me to vote because what is, like, what's the point of voting? So, so many of our conversations, we go to churches, community events, colleges , sometimes we'll just go to community fairs and we'll walk around and just talk to people and say, Hey, are you registered to vote?

[00:07:18] We go to expungement. Now, yes, Michigan has automatic expungement, but it's still gonna take a while for that process to be refined. So there are people who are, they're still having expungement fairs. And so when we go there, we talk to folks and we ask them if they're registered to vote. And probably three out of 10 people are not that we've experienced at these expungements.

[00:07:46] So we register them to vote and then we. Make sure that they know to tell their friends and family. Listen, even if you're justice involved, you have a right to vote in Michigan so you, the only time you're not able to vote is if you are currently serving your sentence in Michigan. It's a huge barrier. And so that is one of the things that, that with VAC that we're actively working on and also going to coffee hours, telling people how that, , our legislators work for us. So it's so important to tell them about these issues that impact us.

[00:08:23] Housing, employment mental health. We have to tell them and let them know that they actually work for the people. So, , so one of the things that we actively do is go out to these coffee hours, especially right now, they're on break and make sure that, , they know like the people are watching and we're holding them 

[00:08:44] accountable.


[00:08:44] Marker
---

[00:08:44] . So there is, they're what we call good time credits, right? So good time credits can reduce person's actual time in prison, right? It's called good conduct time or good credits. And so there. Laws that actually in different states where people are able to get time off their sentences by, it could be taking classes or taking certain jobs or they're.

[00:09:15] Things that allow you, credits that allow you to get a reduction of sentence, right, so that you may get a earlier release, but with truth in sentencing, you have to serve your full sentence. You don't get a reduction in time. It's the full length of time that you've been sentenced. And so, so many people are like their families that are impacted.

[00:09:42] By the fact that we no longer have good time credits. So right now in Michigan, there's a huge fight to reinstate good time. And I will tell you, the organization is Michigan Justice Advocacy. They are really leading the fight. For good times. So Michigan is on, is one of only six states with no policy for good time or earned time credits.

[00:10:09] . I know that they're looking. It's House Bill 4450, sponsored by Rep Tyrone Carter.


[00:10:16] Marker
---

[00:10:16] We also have one more, which is prison gerrymandering that people may not know about, but with prison gerrymandering, you're counted even though you cannot vote while you're in prison in Michigan your body is actually counted so that reps the different areas where the prisons are, which are usually.

[00:10:38] White and rural they are able to count you, whereas your home community where you're actually from gets none of the funding or support because it goes to the community where you are. Body is housed. And so prison gerrymandering is something that we, that at VAC we are actively fighting to end prison gerrymandering.

[00:11:02] And it is in the legislative, it's SB 33. And so we're really fighting to see that we actually count people where they're from. Prison is not their home. Prison is no one's home.

[00:11:15] I'm really passionate about legislation because I feel like policy and legislation is really where we can start making things better for everyone, especially people who are justice involved and people who who are impacted by what we call our legal system. 


[00:11:31] Marker
---

[00:11:31] , there's so many different organizations that are trying to do this work and trying to support people who are justice involved., one of the problems I've experienced is that, We're like in these different silos.

[00:11:44] That one group is over here doing amazing work. Another group is over here, but we're not working on it together. And so, , our resources are limited. We're working ourselves to death and because it's hard work mentally, and, and that takes a physical taxing toll on your body. And so one of my hopes is that we'll be more that we can come together to, to do this work.

[00:12:14] As opposed to staying on the outfield. 

[00:12:18] There is definite interconnection because if you don't have a safe place to lay your head at night, if you don't have a job to pay just to live and survive if you don't have reproductive freedom then. Why would you care about voting? Why would you care about these other issues?

[00:12:39] So that's why they, to me, are all interconnected. 

