Clarence Price
Link: https://vimeo.com/848581988
===


[00:00:00] challenge_education
---

[00:00:00] for years I worked in four different schools. My focus was English language arts, seventh and eighth grade.

[00:00:06] Eventually education became overbearing. It's, it's changed. Teachers are required to do too much, and so I started working. I took a part-time job at Delta Airlines and I started working at Delta, and I let go of education for a while, found a new job. I was flying all over the world. I had this.

[00:00:25] Great opportunity to experience different things. So I went away from education. Guess selfishly cuz I'm an educator at heart. But in 2018 I jumped back into education and I started educational service company that provides youth enrichment and mentoring. So my values were, you should read more, travel more, understand the habits of CEOs and develop. Tools to understand their mental health. My mother lost her mind when I was 11 years old, so I watched my mother suffer from schizophrenia from 11 till she passed when I was 27. So I kind of made myself a mental health expert watching my mother suffer. So for the years of her going back and forth to doctors getting prescribed medications, that didn't work.

[00:01:11] And so for years I. Was right there next to her trying to figure out why my mother. And so as an adult I started to see how essential understanding of mental health was younger and younger is something that we don't talk about. As a community, when my mother was losing her mind, my mother would bust all the windows out the house, walk down the street naked.

[00:01:30] Like I'm lucky that we didn't have a cell phone back there back then, or you would probably see my mother on some of the videos that you see on the news today. So seeing that That tragedy, that's a tragedy for a young man to see his mother in that state. You couldn't talk about it. It was nobody that I could say, Hey, I'm dealing with the worst trauma of my life over here.

[00:01:49] So instead, I built my personality. I was able to make you laugh. I was able to talk about your truth, to hide my truth. And so ultimately what I've built now with the educational service company is an opportunity to be able to share those experiences and make sure that youth that are possibly experienced what I experienced, have out outlets and things to be able to help them to deal with the struggle of mental health in our community.

[00:02:17] It's not just necessarily in my home, but as I've gotten older, I've. Had friends that was dealing with the exact same thing and they were like me hiding behind the mask of that trauma. So for me it is getting those resources to the youth and making sure they have access to how they can Be able to develop their toolbox and deal in these times. 


[00:02:41] challenge_child_hunger
---

[00:02:41] youth hunger in Detroit. How can you think right when you're not eating right. 

[00:02:45] There are 300,000 school-aged children in the state of Michigan that are food insecure. Most children, they say that are food insecure, go hungry from Friday to Sunday when school is out. So most of these children rely on.

[00:03:01] What they get from school to feed themselves so if we have students who are hungry Friday through Sunday, and then they say the last two weekends of the month, the last third and fourth week of the month when the bridge card or the food assistant card runs out, that they're most hungry.

[00:03:18] So if we have students who are hungry on the weekend, then when they show up to school Monday, how can we expect to hold them to any standard when. Gut health and mental health inter correlated. So learning that and seeing the, the, the effects working inside of the school. I worked in Highland Park School District.

[00:03:35] I was at Brenda Scott seven Mile in Hoover. That's considered the red zone. So I was in these places and as you look back at some of the behavior issues we faced, I'm often compelled to wonder, was it the lack of nutrition? Were we failing nutritionally? As the basis of education. So if you don't have a healthy breakfast, how could I have been grading you and holding you accountable when you didn't have the basic tools to be successful?


[00:04:02] Marker
---

[00:04:02] So for me, that's been another passion with mental health and food because I see it so correlated that. How can we be that beacon of education? More so not how can we feed people, but how can we teach people to fish? How can we teach people to be able to harvest their food, grow their own food?

[00:04:21] And so ultimately that's where we're over here piloting. Now we're at a farm that has 15 acres in the middle of Detroit. And the students aren't going out and seeing, alright, I have to weed today. I have to make sure this is watered. I have to harvest the vegetables. And it's ultimately showing them where their food comes from.

[00:04:39] The sooner you're able to understand what's in your food, how to get your food, it creates a different level of confidence. As far as hunger. If you're hungry, you liable to do anything to be able to feed yourself. But when you could be able to go in the backyard, start a small garden, start a fruit tree raise some chickens, we also have eight different animals here that students are able to work around and understand the growth and life lifecycle of those things give you the confidence to be able to.

[00:05:09] Help build themselves. So my company is rooted in how can we expose younger youth. Right now I'm working with all students. It's probably between the age of, they're all probably 14 to 17, but ideally my thought is, We've gotta start back in kindergarten, like the things that they're over here piling is ultimately the curriculum that I wanna present to schools for the kindergarten.

[00:05:31] Bring your kindergarten children over here and let them learn how to raise chickens and collect eggs and how to plant and harvest food because food is an issue. Those numbers, knowing that in the richest country in the world, there are 3 million children in this country that. Don't have access to healthy, nutri nutritious, nutritious food.

[00:05:50] That's terrifying. But it's, it's more of a, I think it's more of an education issue than a financial issue because we're not taught, we're no longer taught the importance of growing and being able to control your own food. 


[00:06:04] challenge_tech_access
---

[00:06:04] To the resources of technology, like being able to make sure youth are exposed to where technology is headed.

[00:06:11] It's like we're being pulled through a sonic boom, how fast things are evolving and moving forward. And if you're not caught up to where it's headed, you'll be left behind. And so I think make, making sure youth have that access to. Those jobs that are going to be essential to surviving in the future.

[00:06:30] If you don't have access to wifi, you don't have access to The future. So with those lack of resources, there's gotta be some type of programming that we create to be able to make sure that our kids aren't getting left behind.

[00:06:44] Cause ultimately that's what it turns into is you being left behind. I think that's huge for the Detroit community.


[00:06:50] Marker
---

[00:06:50] Lgd educational services. Ideally, I envision my curriculum being in all schools across Detroit for youth that allow them to be able to build confidence, build understanding, and be connected to those resources. I'm all about creating possibilities for you. So the more experts that I can get these kids around, the more bosses I can connect with, the more bosses we can get to come and connect and input in the youth.

[00:07:17] The skills that are needed, how can we cut the time that it takes for them to be successful? And then in turn, they carry and cover the nonprofit organization, urban Community Outreach, where our focus is youth hunger how can we teach the youth to understand what's in their food to better build them and be able to be.

[00:07:35] Productive citizens in the community and in turn, impart that knowledge on those coming behind us because ultimately we're all connected, and if I'm failing, those next to me are failing. So if I'm succeeding, I should be able to connect with those next to me and help them to succeed. So, Just trying to do the work of person that I needed when I was young.

[00:07:58] And so that's been my passion and my direction of how can I be that, that visionary and that beacon of light to help somebody behind. 


[00:08:06] Marker
---

[00:08:06] Yeah. So, you know, now I have a therapist. Now I'm connected to a lot of the resources and counselors and people who point us in a direction. We invite them in to come talk, we invite them. We had a Narcan training here 

[00:08:19] . I could save a life. Yeah. Mm-hmm. I could save a life. Yep. So all my students, all my youth in the program were able to go through Narcan training. And so it's just things like that, just getting the experts to be able to come and say, Hey, here are these resources.

[00:08:33] Here are the things that you didn't know we're here and this is how you can help someone else. So just finding the resources and putting them in front of these babies to be able to. Have a fighting chance. 


[00:08:45] Marker
---

[00:08:45] As a percentage of the kids in Detroit, I probably can impact 1%, but it's, it is my ideal is. I aim to be able to pack the top impact the top 10%. If we build up and educate the top 10%, they can turn around and help lead and educate the other 90%. So my focus is how can you send me your, your leaders, send me your bosses, send me your students, your impact drivers, and then turn I'll provide them with the re resources, the experience and understanding, and then they can go back into their, They're a village and they can do the same for those that I can't reach.


[00:09:21] Marker
---

[00:09:21] So, the program we're hosting right now is partnership between L G D Educational Services, urban Community Outreach, grow, Detroit Young Talent. The Youth Connection, Pingry Farms and Milton manufacturer grow Detroit Young Grow Detroit. Young talent and the Youth Connection are both resources that are very big on helping youth get.

[00:09:43] Access to funding and the resources that youth need. So students are paid by those organizations and they're, for six weeks, they go to different work sites to work. So Pingry Farms and Milton Manufacturing agreed to host the students here. So the students come, they have garden duties, barn duties.

[00:10:03] We have a viticulture program that's hosted by Michigan State so students can come and learn how to grow grapes and develop grapes into jelly and things like that. We have an archery program and then it's on the campus of Milton Manufacturer. Milton Manufacturing is a government fabricator that fabric fabricates government vehicles, so ultimately student, these students can go into manufacturing plant.

[00:10:27] You can't go to college and learn how to fabricate it. Government vehicle that's here, you literally have to go in, somebody has to take you under their wing and start showing you how it's done. So ultimately it's these students can go in and develop an engineering skill that'll pay them six figures for the rest of their life without ever going to college.

[00:10:49] And so it's right here at seven mile and 75. Most people don't even know it exists, but to me that's the opportunity to be able to. Increase more possibility. So, Pingry Farms is a farm that's 15 acres. It's 25 acres, 15 acres of it is planet. It hosts the four H program that has eight different animals.

[00:11:10] What makes us unique is 

[00:11:11] to join four H. To raise and show animals. Ultimately, these students have to have their own farm, or you have to go out and rent an animal. But what makes Pingry unique is that the students don't have to lease their animals. So we have eight different animals for students to learn and go to county fair and show.

[00:11:28] Ultimately, it's just A campus of opportunity. And so the students that are over here, they're, they're making impact by improving the hoop house, improving the barn, and they're improving the gardens. So we're going to continue to collect the food, donate the food, and we got three more weeks of just them being able to do something that they normally wouldn't do.

[00:11:50] Most of these young people would be, if I spin the phone around right now, There's eight of 'em in here. You wouldn't know it was eight of 'em in here. They all on their phone. They, none of 'em, were talking to each other. So when they come here for these five hours, when they come here for these five hours, it's five hours of me barking at 'em.

[00:12:06] Get off your phone, come on, get out here in this garden. Come on, let's go pick this food. Come on over here and go help in the barn. And so It's exciting to see them develop and come out of their, shell start talking to each other cuz they didn't know each other when they got here. They didn't know me.

[00:12:21] And so now through our program and through this opportunity, you can see bonds forming. You can see you've taken ownership like. Each one is taking ownership in something else they like. One of the workers enjoys working with the bunnies. So he does everything retaining the bunnies.

[00:12:37] Another one enjoys the goats, another enjoys the garden, another enjoys the hoop piles. So it's these opportunities that I'm watching for him, and it's exciting to see young people doing things that they normally wouldn't do. It's no large farms in the city of Detroit. So where else can you get access animals and this type of garden. So it is, it is, it is definitely doing what I imagined it would do. I've been executive director at Pingry Farms for a year now. July 1st, I stepped in and my focus was to increase the education. So ideally I wanted. To be able to create a space of enrichment. I didn't expect that it would be paid, that I would have students paid to be here.

[00:13:17] It's definitely exciting for me to see. 

