Cozine Welch
Link: https://vimeo.com/853837255
===

[00:00:00] , I was just telling a friend yesterday. A really close friend about my disappointment and it relates to, to incarceration, But also just my expectancy of what the future would hold. And I was explaining to them how like, I'm really disappointed that in a lot of dystopian films or books that I read, those who are the underserved, I.

[00:00:16] There was always those who, who seemed to have some connection to technology, They still were able to get access to enough of the parts or information or knowledge to assemble something on their own in their hobble they, they didn't have running or clean water, but they could utilize this information in some pieces and parts and create something wonderful, 

[00:00:33] and that's not what I see. In today's present, which is supposed to be a future I was supposed to look forward to, I don't see any folks who I know who are in any of these neighborhoods that I go into who are speaking in code, who are telling me about this and that. and when you do find it, it's an anomaly.

[00:00:48] It's something you like. Oh, oh, wow. Because you recognize just like it's a food desert, it's a technology desert. Right. And not just technology, but information about technology, the understanding of it,

[00:00:58] There's so much technology that they have and that we should have, but just not everyone has access to, This is the future we were promised in the eighties and the nineties anyway, 


[00:01:07] Marker
---

[00:01:07] my story starts in Detroit. It takes a progressive step towards the Detroit suburb of Southfield.

[00:01:15] Like we were three houses across the, the, the divider line we had made it. And then it transitions to prison term at 17 years old, which saw me spending 20 years incarcerated. And then there's the return for the last five years. So, I'll, I'll kind of go backwards in a way, because the return is kind of the most immediate and the things I overcame and the difficulties I face can all be traced pathologically back to the beginning, 

[00:01:42] So I'm one of those folks that was like really fortunate in that I understood technology in the ways that a lot of my, like contemporaries didn't a lot of folk when I was inside. When I was younger, I, I just always had a I don't wanna say a knack for it, but an interest. And I was fortunate enough that, when I, when I was coming up, my parents cared enough about me and my interest that they had got me like this encyclopedia set, 

[00:02:04] And so, and that would like, so now I'm getting to learn about everything and, and so when I get a, a video game system is something different to me. But I never got to, like, I, I was never like the idea of like opening stuff up and tinkering with like that was never something I had to, I. Idea. I had the idea for it, but never the ability to, because I mean, let's be honest, you gotta have resources for that.

[00:02:23] Like if your parents went and broke they back and sweat to get you this video game system, you bet not break that thing apart. I don't care how much you think you might find out or, or where you think you might be in the future because you learned about circuitry, so, so it was one of those things where it's like, even when you have the idea, you don't necessarily have the ability to even, tinker with stuff yourself because of socioeconomic issues.

[00:02:42] But I always had an interest. Science was always my thing. And so when I was incarcerated, I was a person that science digests and sci-fi news that was the stuff like I, that would, would be some things I would do for my own personal interest to kind of feed my own soul. And also it kept me. Abreast of what was going on. 


[00:03:00] Marker
---

[00:03:00] While I'm incarcerated, I end up signing up for what's called the Legal Writer Program.

[00:03:04] So I'm really, I'm like pretty good at the law because, I was trying to appeal my own case. And so just, by circumstance I became educated and the idea of helping other folks was like, yeah, you don't wanna have your knowledge and go to waste, and they were gonna pay me for it.

[00:03:16] So it was like, win-win. And ironically enough, they were gonna pay me, which is the highest rate anyone in the MDOC can get, Like it was, it was, it was the baller status of $3 34 cents a day. When most people were getting 17 and a half cents an hour or something like that.

[00:03:31] I was getting $3 34 in a day now. But the real boon of that was I then had access to a laptop. I had to go through a training. I had to, 'cause I had to prepare folks legal brief. I had to communicate with the law firm I

[00:03:43] so I would prepare legal brief through the research, et cetera, et cetera, or any post-conviction remedy. And I would submit it to them for approval. They would go over it for something to be fixed. They would fix it, some new case law, whatever it may be. Because, we also did research and we got up to date case law, and then I would send it, I would give it, prepare for the person and help them mail it out, et cetera.

[00:03:59] So that meant that every day. I was at a laptop, at a desktop, and at one point even I had a little notebook. They had something happened wrong with the desktop and they gave us these little notebooks, So I was having this daily connection and understanding with how to navigate windows and sub folders, 

[00:04:15] Graphic user interfaces, all of that. So my experience knowledge is so different right now. I didn't realize that completely until I come home. And for me it's like, I can't wait. When I first got my, when I got my first phone, maybe the first couple weeks I was home, I used to have nightmares about breaking it.

[00:04:32] I would have literal nightmares where I would wake up thinking I had broken my phone or dropped it. Right. It was so important. It was so much the key to what was gonna make me a real human being out here. Right. I, I'm gonna be a real boy. And so it was, I was fra but I found that I had an aptitude for, or familiarity with it.


[00:04:50] Marker
---

[00:04:50] A lot of folks who I was coming home with didn't, and especially I and I, that I think I expected, what I didn't expect was to come home after 20 years of incarceration. The only technology I had access to was, again, a desktop. I'm, and like, I'm not even using Google Sheets or anything. I'm using Open Office, 

[00:05:06] like, we're not even using, like, so I, it's not like I'm in here doing, doing some weird stuff. And then we ended up getting some digital MP3 or MP4 players. So music listening. And they will also allow you to craft little letters through the JPay system. And you can also download photographs that your friends and family sent you.

[00:05:23] That's the technology everyone in MDOC had access to. . And it's very much just like you would imagine on a, a player on your phone, it's, it's a few menus. . What I wasn't prepared for was that so many of folks who are already home, my friends and family and loved ones, would be so behind.

[00:05:36] I didn't expect to come home and I become the tech guy, not even six months from being home. Yeah, yeah. Seriously. I'm the one going through the phone, connecting this, showing 'em how to do that, finding why this is doing that, recognizing that you got some malware, like, I. But that I would have to do that with people who were already out here the past two decades.

[00:05:54] That's what really blew my mind. So when now I get a job at a place, so I ended up getting this offer to become an executive director to nonprofit called A Brighter Way. And the nonprofits focus on helping folks who are returning from home especially longer returning citizens, but anyone returning from home in Washtenaw County to to have a mentor to assist system with their transition and also to providing what's called, like we call wraparound services, That goes from anything from housing assistance to covid assistance, to job assistance, to interview assistance, to resumes, whatever. Because you can't assume that someone's coming home from incarceration and only needs a thing or two, you have to look at that whole person and their whole needs. So while doing this is when I came into real direct contact with just how far behind we are when coming home from incarceration and not just because this is the important because.

[00:06:39] Time away from society further stagnated us. But because before we went, even went in, we were already behind. We never, we, we weren't going in with any, any, any route to latch onto. No familiarity to begin with. So now you take someone outta society who, before they left only knew of email from a television show.

[00:06:57] It wasn't prior daily interactions or needs, and 20, 25, 30 years later, you bring them home and let them know, like, Hey, you gotta know how to do this. Not only do you have to know how to do it, you have to understand what it is, why it is, and how it works. Like you would have, had you grown through it, had you grown up with it, And the major things like the, the thing I think that troubled me the most was that it's no easy fix. we, we we're, we're forgetting that. Those of us who are familiar with this, we became so over time by ourselves, over someone guiding us over catching some piece of information on television that made sense to us because we knew, right, that commercial maybe that said something about, oh, GUI, you knew that because you knew what G U I was.

[00:07:37] So it made something happen for your brain that it didn't happen. Those other five people who standing with you didn't piece of information to begin with. That has been like the hardest thing, well, the, I should say, told the hardest thing has been to figure out how do you give someone an understanding of technology and how it interfaces with us every day, not just how to do it, because you can't, 'cause I've been, I, I've shown people step by step how to get into their email.

[00:08:03] But they didn't do it on their own successfully until they understood why they had to have two factor where it went to in relay. Like I had to have conversations with this, conversations like this with people because I knew this and could gather it from my experiences and from people teaching me. But if someone hasn't even had that, how do you expect them to jumpstart or to kick ahead of that?

[00:08:25] And so like for me, I see that as like the biggest challenge is how do you. Give someone an understanding, familiarity. And not only that, but I don't even wanna say acceptance. Ownership of technology that they've never been given. They've never been told they're worthy of it, that it was theirs. It was always something that was for other people outside and for white folks that wasn't them.

[00:08:45] Or for upper class folks, that wasn't them. Or for educated folks that wasn't there, but always folks that wasn't them. And now we realize, oh, that was a disservice. And we're trying to understand how to shortcut 15 years of absence. And I don't mean absence in a person being around, but absenting, anybody including the world giving, excuse my language, giving a fuck about them knowing anything about this.

[00:09:06] So, and now I put, now I put on top of this, this is, this is the funny part. Now I put on top of all of that, This 65 year old gentle rehabilitated. Childlike in a lot of ways. Soul that is also stuck in their ways,

[00:09:19] because when they find into the difficulty of just opening Gmail and it makes them cry, what hell hope do they have for website development? Right. For understanding anything else. And

[00:09:31] that's the thing that. You, you only can provide a space for to ignite on its own. Now it's, it's a thing I, I still struggle with and it was something I realized a few years ago was like, I was afraid me, I was afraid of this damn laptop because I was worried that there was gonna be another instance where I would be looking to do something that should take me 10 or 15 minutes.

[00:09:53] And my ignorance would sit me there for an hour and a half. And my absence from society and familiarity and being with folks in it didn't, wasn't there to let me know that this wasn't a, me being gone for 20 years problem. It was just a everyday, everyone who deals with this particular program problem.

[00:10:09] Right. I don't, I, because I don't, because I don't have the ownership, the familiarity, I don't feel like it's mine. I don't even know when it's my fault. And so if no one's there to tell me like no. That's just what No, I'm sorry man. Like you were trying to get something outta that and that's just a, a sucky program.


[00:10:23] Marker
---

[00:10:23] I'm a statewide organizer at an organization called American Friend Service Committee or a national nonprofit, but I work in the Michigan Ypsilanti chapter, focusing right now on Second Look Legislation, trying to get that passed, get some votes in the House and Senate and get some people home.


[00:10:35] Marker
---

[00:10:35] I don't think we act, we often talk about and that is what we pour into a vacuum. And what I mean by that is, I. I take myself, for example, the, the story I just gave you. I came home, I was in prison for 20 years. I was 17 years old. I don't care how much, how fast I was with tech inside.

[00:10:53] I don't care how many Walkman Walkmans I learned to fix or how much I could, school around on open source software on my closed in, closed in computer with no access to the internet, The fact that I would come back, had my phone for a couple weeks, maybe, And somehow now be a go-to person for my family and my community was ridiculous.

[00:11:14] And it's like, because even though I needed, and I wa, I had holes that needed to be filled where I was going, had holes larger, you have to think about not only us, but our environment and where we're gonna be going, Like, so the idea of it becoming a lifestyle, a thing that you do sounds great when you're around people doing it.

[00:11:34] But when you see me back to Pinehurst and school craft, man, ain't nobody checking their emails, man. No one, what I mean? Like, it, it that, that, that way of living. Right. The, the, the way the, the realization of how we can pres propel you forward is not present because the desert, it's not real for us.

[00:11:51] There. Technology is not real for us there. why? 'cause it ain't did shit for us there. But help us get on social media and invite ourselves more. But we still got food deserts still underserved in our schools. No one's coming outta school. A, a, a tech genius. Not because you get a a a a notebook for $65.

[00:12:08] That hasn't changed anything in the school. That $65 notebook doesn't mean that that kid's now gonna be finishing high school on time. So, like, and I, and that's obviously a, a problem too big for, for, for this approach, but it's one to be aware of because, whatever you do, that's where you're gonna be putting it at, you're gonna be putting your resources into someplace someone who has them and will.

[00:12:30] Be great for them, but they're likely gonna go somewhere where there aren't any. So how do you keep it going? when you send that person off to the sea on a raft, how do you, what's gonna be your way to morris code to signal them at the lighthouse so they know what they're connected to. They can keep sending information where they are.

[00:12:45] That's the problem that I keep running into. And it's like, I, I think so a friend who I'm now fortunate enough to work with is a partner who I'm working with. When she came home four years ago, or three and a half, four years ago when I first started a, because like, there's another thing too.

[00:12:59] I started this program, I'm executive director, this nonprofit in less than two years home from a 20 year sentence. And my job is to help people who are returning home, make their way where I'm still learning it, But one, but I mean, there was no, there was no one else who was gonna do it.

[00:13:12] There was no one doing it. Who the hell else could, what I mean? Like so I met a wonderful person, friend of mine named Lawanda. Now I'm working with her and me and Lawanda sat and cried so many nights, so many hours, so many times, so many days about just trying to understand it, trying to get the familiarity with everything from the phone to the laptop, to the interface between the two, to being able to check the Gmail on your phone through the app instead of having to log in.

[00:13:38] And now, She's sending me Gmail, now she's sharing Google Docs with me. It took time and it took her being in the environment of folks who do it, if Lawanda hadn't have been around us, and American Friend Service Committee and all the things that she's doing to keep her in the loop. She'd have been just like the other of our friends who came home and got something going and then just found somewhere else to be, because I don't care where anybody puts on the TV screen paper, there's no spots out here like that.

[00:14:07] No one's coming and reaching out to us in that way to where each of us feels like we've got a chance. There's some possibility for us. The fuck there is, there's a reality we see in front of us like the last 25 years. .

[00:14:18] Like we are gonna go back out into our deserts where we sleep and live, and somehow we gotta keep that water flowing to us. So make sure the program has some way to keep us connected, to keep us in the loop. 'cause we're gonna have to loop others in. We gotta stay connected.


[00:14:32] Marker
---

[00:14:32] We have to live within this system and these issues and find, it's, it's like the, it's like the nonprofit approach, You have, or, or you have the folks who are on the ground not the nonprofit approach, but the social change approach where you have the two sides, right.

[00:14:44] Folks on the ground who are helping, the folks who are tending to the wounded, so to speak. Right. And then you have the folks who are, in the political room or what have you, who are making sure that the laws that hurt the wounded get taken off. Like you have to have, you have to have both operating at the exact same time.

[00:14:59] You can't forge go one for the other. And so that has to be done by actors other than ourselves, But we still also have to do things that we can in these unfair systems to, to, to, to alleviate and to, guard against some of 

