E. B. Jordan
Link: https://vimeo.com/856513965
===

[00:00:00] , my name is E. B. Jordan, out of the great state of Detroit, Michigan. I am the founder and executive director of S&amp;D PJ J Housing, and I'm also the outreach director for VAC Voting Access for All. And one of the challenges I faced when I first came out was housing. I couldn't rent anywhere. To save my life.

[00:00:22] I was part of the building trades in Huron Valley, so I figured I'd have a job with Habitat for Humanity, since they use Habitat for Humanity in prison. But when I came out, I asked, I applied for the job. They said I was a felon, so I tried to apply for the housing program, may have, and they also said I couldn't get out 'cause I was a felon.

[00:00:41] Living on your family member's couch or your friend's couch or whoever couch after a while gets harassing and you are actually homeless. And I tried to get help through different organizations. They told me I wasn't homeless. Well, that's not my address. I'm just sleeping on the couch. So I got frustrated and I went and moved into abandoned house.

[00:01:00] That house actually used to be a house I stayed in from zero to 18. It was my grandfather's house. But in Detroit, abandoned house come with holes in the walls and everything's stolen. So the radiator, the boiler gone, holes in the floor snatching up the radiator holes in the wall, stealing the pipes. They stole the bathroom, stole the kitchen.

[00:01:20] It was just all closets. Taking building trades inside of Huron Valley. I put my house together. So when the sun came up, I worked the sun, went down and went to sleep. I still had my aunt that didn't stay too far from me. I went to her house if I really need to sleep and take a shower. My, my neighbors was awesome.

[00:01:37] I went knocked on anybody door, use the bathroom, get something to eat, take a break. But I'm there now. Still working on it, but it's, it is way past. It is, it's livable. It is way livable now compared to when I first moved in. Now I just have little minor makeup things I need to do.

[00:01:54] But then I finally went into my neighborhood, they said, what you gonna do?

[00:01:57] You done went to prison, so what? Your house been empty for over 30 years. Nobody living in there. And so I moved in 'cause I couldn't find a place to stay.

[00:02:05] And then I found the owner, and then they they signed the deeded over to me.

[00:02:09] I paid for it, but they signed the deeded over to me . I actually paid attention to building trades. 'cause I came from a cooking background, so being in there and I was frustrated and I was like, you know what? I might as well get something outta this and I'm not gonna be here forever. So, and with that, I used to do odd jobs to get money to put my house together.

[00:02:27] You know, learning how to drywall, helping people frame out stuff they need. Some carpenters, there was some paint on the wall, do some demo work. Anything that had to do with housing at that time to put my house still to get a couple of dollars. I was working under the table, but it made it happen. 

[00:02:41] .

[00:02:41] Because getting a job, job I got, got tired of saying, you know, you, you check the box, it's a wrap. You know, my name ain't felony 'cause I got a felony, you know? I mean, 

[00:02:50] shoot. 

[00:02:51] . Besides Habitat for Humanity, I went looking. I really am not a factory person.

[00:02:57] The factory thing was not for me. I never wanted to work with none of the big three working hard, long hours for killing your body. The two and few, the two, the, the, the two and few dollars at like McDonald's and stuff, that wasn't gonna help me. Pay for rent and eat and pay my parole officer and pay DTE.

[00:03:18] And that was another problem. The little jobs they did have, it wasn't worth going to. 'cause it's not going either. It's gonna help me pay for my parole officer and not gave me something to eat. Or I paid for something to eat, not pay for my parole officer, but it wasn't helping me with rent if I was to actually, it wasn't livable.

[00:03:35] And the ones that are livable you, you can't have a felony. So it was just hard. 


[00:03:40] Marker
---

[00:03:40] I actually gotta pay somebody to look at me and say, have you been in trouble? Where you staying? Did you change your address?

[00:03:46] Are you working? I, I see you next week. , I had supervision fees. I forgot how much it was. It was a while ago. But yeah, I had supervision fees. 

[00:03:55] Get a job, because you gotta pay your supervision fees. And then I heard stories of, you know, It wasn't me, but some, you know, you violate your probation or you can't get off of parole until your supervision fees are paid off.

[00:04:09] So I made sure my twos and fews was going there. 

[00:04:12] When you go, I was used to going in and ask for an application, but they say you had to do it online.

[00:04:17] And so, you know, you go in and ask, can I get a application? They have your paper application. So that changed. Doing it online, no more in-person, stuff like that. Everything started phasing in to go online 

[00:04:29] go online to fill out for your Medicaid, Medicare, your, food stamps, everything went to online and talking to the computer people on the phone, and I was used to going in person and talking to people. 

[00:04:43] I, I don't like the way society has phased into dependent on technology. That's just my personal opinion. 

[00:04:50] S&amp;D PJ Housing. because I didn't want the women to go through what I went through not, So now I help women returning home from prison and hopefully in three months I have my own house.

[00:04:59] So they will have a place to parole too. . I have different programs helping them. I do without the house. I, you can do it at my office or we meet up somewhere. 

[00:05:09] I have a CARES program right now where I meet the ladies when they get outta prison and it's a welcome home bag with soap, deodorant, toothpaste, toothbrush, washcloth, towel mouthwash, all the basic needs.

[00:05:23] Toiletries we need. I was embarrassed to ask somebody buy me some pads and a toothbrush and some soap and some deodorant when I first came out. 'cause I ain't have, I didn't have any money when I first came out. And so asking me, and I'm a grown woman, asking somebody to buy my toiletries was, was kind of embarrassing.


[00:05:38] Marker
---

[00:05:38] I have another program called Free Donors Receive Education and Employment and it goes through, Writing your resume. We do mock interviews because at the interview, they're gonna look at your resume and see there's a gap in your resume and you have to explain that gap in your resume.

[00:05:53] Like where you been, well, why, why you been gone so long. And then I have a CPA that does the financial literacy part because we need to learn how to manage our money better than. Better than we our parents did. 'cause a lot of us didn't get the financial literacy part and they don't teach it in school.

[00:06:10] They starting to teach it now, but my age, you get a credit card, swipe it. If, if your credit bad, use your kids' social security number, get back on it. That was my era, we need to, we need to eliminate that, but, To give us more financial literacy over ourselves, period.

[00:06:26] Because we coming out and we wanna do better than what we did when we went in. Learn about taxes. I have a lady that helps people with banking. So if you have a banking problem, you gotta go through her banking course she give you a year and then she'll straighten you out. You have a regular bank account.


[00:06:40] Marker
---

[00:06:40] If you wanna do a business yourself and you wanna do the entrepreneurship, you know, we could get you together a small business plan. Once you finish the whole program you get a, I'll pay for your LLC and get your EIN number to start your own business. And then you walk away with a laptop and a backpack full of office supplies the simple starter stuff. So stuff like that, I feel once you establish on your feet and you're ready to build yourself a little bit more, and I also partner with an online college that does IT work so anybody's in the IT world. I got an online college. I paid for the first year scholarship, and then you can go to it school if you are interested in that because you know that's taken over and since you, you're, you are returning home.

[00:07:23] That's something you do online as far as work. And you, you, you, you're entrepreneur, so you got a better chance of be yourself, self-employed yourself, you know, just giving you a, a, a step out there. 


[00:07:34] Marker
---

[00:07:34] And then VAC, Voting Access for All. I was not a politician. I wasn't into politics. I wasn't into none of this.

[00:07:43] If I didn't go to prison, none of this would not have came to fruition. I would've still been in somebody's kitchen cooking something, but it took me to go in there to come back out and look at the world different eyes that I didn't pay attention to voting. I voted 'cause I was told I was supposed to vote in my household and that was it.

[00:07:58] You go vote, go vote. But I never. Really paid attention to what I'm voting for and what, what's the use for it. And working next to Nation Outside and they pushing all these policies, they busting their butt. Now we need to go vote on them for us, for us to get our rights back. We go in different neighborhoods now they say, you know, the suburbs have this, and suburbs have that.

[00:08:18] As I got older, the suburbs voting for all of that and we not voting. So of course they gonna close everything around us and wanna know why we don't have it. Well, we not speaking up. If you don't say anything, they gonna close it. They gonna make the decision to close it. So Voting Access for All was, was, was a great, great opportunity for me to help found.

[00:08:38] I'm one of the founders, we need to inform people coming home. They need to learn that they had the right to vote. And then, The more we tell people they had a right to vote.

[00:08:47] 'cause I'm out in the community tabling and tabling and going to different organization, going to different type of functions to let 'em know and they like, you know, I got a felony, I can't vote. I said, I got one too, but I've been voting since I got out. Just because you got it, that don't mean you can't vote.

[00:09:01] And they was like, well my vote don't count. And this what I stick 'em with. Let's talk about stuff that happened locally. What's happening in your neighborhood? Why don't you start there voting on that. If you had a prosecutor or if you had a judge, you know, you could vote them outta the seat 'cause they didn't put you in jail.

[00:09:15] Whatever your reason, you can vote them out and get somebody else new in. But that person that's going in, they have all these coffees and meetups and all that type of stuff. Go figure out who running for whatever and see what they're about and then see if you wanna vote for 'em. 


[00:09:30] Marker
---

[00:09:30] When they did the redistricting that tore us all up, they moved the lines all over the place. It's horrible. It's horrible because now a friend of mine, he was, he was he was state representative, but when they moved the lines, he lost because lines went to, into the suburbs.

[00:09:47] He ain't know, know them people over there, they didn't know. They didn't know anything about him. Some of the suburbs coming over into the city, the line moved over into the city. We don't know that person running for that's supposed to be representing us. So that's another thing I'm kind of disappointed about moving the lines.

[00:10:02] The fact that I am a returning citizen, I have tried my best to do everything, despite the fact I got an &quot;F&quot; behind my name.

[00:10:12] So what I'm saying is that I am an ordained minister. I'm a nautical boat captain. So yes, I'm Captain E. B.. I can, I have my boat license, I've been to London Den Africa. Dominican Republic, Cancun, and I went to Africa because I went for a, a conference to talk about my nonprofit organization.

[00:10:32] So over there we were in Kenya and it was 23 countries there, 97 people all saying the same thing. Return to citizens have a hard time finding housing and work. Across the country, 23 countries saying the same thing. 


[00:10:49] Marker
---

[00:10:49] Washington, DC you can vote while you still in, in prison. So I wanted to try to get that policy, like how can we change that rule?


[00:10:57] Marker
---

[00:10:57] Just because I, I got an F behind my name. I try not to make that hinder me and I can't get it expunged. I went through the whole expungement thing. I helped Safe &amp; Just write the expungement law and I went through the, through the motions and I can't get it expunged, and I'm okay with it because it's not holding me back from doing anything I'm trying to do.

[00:11:16] I'm not trying to rent any place. So I'm good and I work for myself 


[00:11:19] Marker
---

[00:11:19] Angel Tree is an organization that go inside the prisons and have the inmates fill out an application for their children to get Christmas presents. Oh, wow. And so once they get the whole list, they reach out to the organization out here and they give you a list of names and then you call the caregivers, like how old is the child?

[00:11:37] What do they like? And you set up a time for them to come pick up their Christmas gifts. So I did 50 children who parents were incarcerated. Oh wow. And that was amazing. That was, that was it. I know. And then I did Easter. I did Easter. I had Easter Bunny here passing out Easter basket for, you know, children who parents are incarcerated, low income family.

[00:11:57] So yes, I'm a donate donating person. I get a phone call when I hear that somebody's coming home. But I just, Got in contact with Huron Valley, the parole officer in Huron Valley, and she has a list of women coming home and I can help them with the CARES Package. My programs, and like I said, right now, I personally don't have a house, but I, you know, try to point 'em in the right direction of other organizations I'm partnering with to get 'em housing.

[00:12:24] So I help over. Couple of hundred ladies so far. 

