Holly Wilson
Link: https://vimeo.com/852556837
===

[00:00:00] . So what I'm seeing as far as returning citizens when they're coming out any barriers or concerns? One thing that I'm seeing, and maybe they don't know how to communicate it is that when they, when they come back trying to merge with a family after they've been removed for so long, and especially the men, the men are coming back, the men are supposed to be the head of the household, right?

[00:00:24] And so coming back to a household where now you're an alpha. With, you know, maybe it's another alpha there. Maybe the child has now become that person that has been helping mom try to hold the family together. So there's a struggle. Right? And it's a struggle. And I don't think that they understand why the struggle exists.

[00:00:45] The pa the passing down of the torch or how we were brought up that the men is supposed to be the head of the household and we know at a lot of the households it's the women. 


[00:00:53] Marker
---

[00:00:53] And then on the other side, the women who have been removed from their children's lives and now they wanna come back and connect with their children's, where they could only see them during a certain time when they were told they couldn't touch 'em, they couldn't do anything.

[00:01:05] And someone else in the family is raising the child. The grandparents are raising a child. And of course, you know, we've all had that where our parents, no matter how old we are, they still think they know better than us. Well, these are my children, right? These are my children, and I understand that you've been taking care of them and you did a great job, but now you need to relinquish that.

[00:01:23] I think there needs to be more services , to help the family with those, those challenges. Because what happens is it's so toxic. It's so toxic that the kids are taking away the, the argument, the the feeling of inadequacy the, the self-doubt. You thought you were ready when you got out, but you weren't equipped with everything.

[00:01:43] You've been away for a long time. Things look different. You know, there, there is time that's needed for you to get acclimated. So that you can be that sole provider. 


[00:01:53] m 
---

[00:01:53] , it's the, the network of folks, the having the awareness and creating this support system before they get out. Recognizing who the support system is and getting it validated before they come out.

[00:02:07] Don't tell 'em once they get out, have it already in place. Right. Already had them introduced to it like we're talking now. Virtually they can do that. They right. The, the judges talk to them virtually sometimes, right? So there, the tools are there, we just need to use them and we need, we, society needs to create this for them.

[00:02:28] They don't know what they need. And so I like the fact that you're interviewing and asking people, I've not been incarcerated. I have I was almost, so, I think I'm scared straight, so I didn't get a chance to go. But I'm among people who are returning citizens all the time, and I'm wowed by them. I just had a class on Saturday Michigan Liberation in Detroit, and there were three facilitators, three young black facilitators, and two of them were returning citizens powerful.

[00:02:56] They had to be in their twenties, early thirties. I'm 51 years old. Powerful. I don't even know if I was speaking like that at that age. So somewhere in that time, either they had it before they went in or they developed it, or somebody poured into them while they were locked up. I know for sure when they got out, they found a support system, something they believed in, and they poured all their time and energy into that.

[00:03:19] A good organization or a good group to look at when people come out and they feel like they don't have a skillset is some grassroots organ organizing because there's always so much work to do, even when you find self-interest, when you find that you're interested in this or you have these problems.

[00:03:35] So I wanna work on this for somebody else that's grassroots organizing. So I think for those people who already don't have stuff, stuff set up where they have self-doubt, We can use this time to train them. All of that money is being pumped in. That training is free, and they're among other people who believe in them.

[00:03:53] And if we don't have them around, people who believe in them, they're gonna go back into the system. So that's what I see. 


[00:03:59] Marker
---

[00:03:59] A lot of people just never got a driver's license, right? So now they've been tucked away for a while and they come back and a lot of people.

[00:04:06] Don't have a high school education. So can they even pass the test? Is there somebody that interprets and read for them? Like, my children are on individualized education plans, the IEP, right? So when they take their test there, there's somebody, a aide that reads to them and they verbalize that who is standing in the place of those people who don't understand the words that's on that driver's license test.

[00:04:27] It doesn't mean it can't drive, it just means that they couldn't comprehend or read. 


[00:04:30] Marker
---

[00:04:30] So I have two, so I have a 31 year old. A 28 year old and a 13 year old, and my 28 year old and my 13 year old both have individualized education plans.

[00:04:42] Although I think my 13 year old is this just the brainiest of the three? I think he just doesn't apply himself. I think he, he has fallen victim to what this lead crisis may have been in Flint. So I think that's where some of his disconnect is because he was a kid that was walking at seven months and never crawled.

[00:05:01] Like he had a first everything and then all of a sudden it was a big switch and there's a problem. So with him, I put him in a different category because it could have been the lead poisoning. We don't know. We won't know for years to come. But my 28 year old, he the reports I used to get on him really saved him because I came from, I came from a family where they believed in whoopings.

[00:05:22] You know, if you didn't do something right or whatever, this is the way you were taught. I hate to say it now, but when I look back at it, it was conditioned from slavery, right? I beat on you and you don't do whatever, right? So we know that's wrong. So my son would get D's and E's, but I would tell you this, before his teachers would show me his report card, they would tell me how thoughtful, respectful.

[00:05:47] How delightful he was to have in their class, how they would work with 20 of him every day. They would, no matter what teacher, they would big him up. And then they would show me his report card and say, well, mom, I want you to know he came in and got extra help in the morning. He, he stayed after school.

[00:06:04] He got help. He, he ditched lunch, he got help. And so all those things helped me because I knew he gave his all, he gave his best. And another thing that came out was they said generally kids who got grades like him had behavioral problems and he didn't have any behavioral problems. Right? He was the clean cut kid.

[00:06:22] He was a respected kid because that's how he was rear. And I worked with him just to get the D's and the E's. I knew it was a challenge 'cause I was up in the middle of the night doing those type of things. So I think too, Your background. You don't have to be a product of your environment, but those people who have already gone, gone into the jails and they weren't all bad.

[00:06:42] Some of 'em came from affluent, , homes and, they had education, but they chose to, they chose to go down this path or they got caught, right? But, Coming back, their challenges may be something different or coming back. They might already have a job set up for them. You, we see all the time on tv it, it's on, it's on tv.

[00:07:02] You can come from a good family and commit a crime. That family's gonna take care of you. You always have a job. It's people under you and you still doing that. Now you doing white collar crime instead of the blue collar crime and, and you know, you got an another layer there. I just think there's a lot of things that go into.

[00:07:19] Why people are returning and the services and programs that need to happen for them. I don't know everything. You don't know everything, but they have to communicate more what their barriers are. The problem is a lot of the ones that are in there haven't used their voice. That's why they've been doing the wrong things.

[00:07:36] They don't know how to use their voice. Is there somebody really there listening to them? Are we just trying to get 'em out, crank 'em out? Oh, they out, we know they gonna come back. It's a big business. I think that they're withholding some of the programming that they know they should have been giving these people so they could come back.

[00:07:51] That's what I think though. That may not necessarily be true. 


[00:07:54] Marker
---

[00:07:54] I'm a community champion. They call me Community Holly. A lot of people are like, oh, that's Holly, you know, community Holly. They don't know what hap that I'm speaking from.

[00:08:03] Because I wear so many. But my current job I work for Michigan United. It's a grassroots organization and I'm in the movement politics department and my region is Detroit, Genessee County and Saginaw, and pretty much. What we do well, I'm in movement politics, but as an organizer slash outreach manager.

[00:08:24] Pretty much what we do is identify injustices and we build campaigns around those injustices. So I may go to, the local grocery store or some other businesses, and I build a relationship so that they understand who we are, what we're doing in the community, because a lot of people come through their doors and they have with whatever problems they have, right? They hear a lot of things. They're, they're like the social worker, right? And they don't even know it. They're a grocery store, but they see the same people. The people that live in the neighborhood, they are yet another source of support, right?

[00:08:52] But if they don't know how to connect the information they receive from those people with another group who's doing it. Then we, we leaving a lot of power on the table. I'm just one vessel to connect that. And grassroots. I also belong to a couple of faith-based organizations where we have an obligation to the community.

[00:09:11] So I'm a a Eastern star, which is auxiliary to the Masons, right. And then I'm a daughter, which is the auxiliary to the Shriners, all has a Masonic foundation. 

[00:09:20] I know I meet people where they are and I think that I have an engineering background. I worked for General Motors for five, six years as an engineer, and I think those, those critical skills that I learned in college and then on the job are things that help me look at things a little different here.

[00:09:37] In the community. Because you know that critical thinking, I always try to figure out why is that happening? I may not know why, but I see about five things that I can flag. Is there something I can do to eliminate one of those things or help to make it better? Or immerse that those five things now into three instead of the five.

[00:09:54] I try to eliminate silos when I see people working in silos and they're overworking themselves like myself burnout, right?

[00:10:01] And then a lot of people don't wanna use their voice 'cause it's like nobody caress, it's just me. Or you have people who are waiting for others to come save them. It's time out here in Genesee County. We can't wait for nobody to come save us. The, the factories are not coming back. We'll be waiting. If we keep waiting, we won't even have a house.

[00:10:17] We got a lot of houses with tarps on them. So you've got people who've been incarcerated who come back to Genessee County or come back to Flint on the North end or anywhere in Flint. And the house they used to live in and grew up in, they got a tree growing up the middle of it. But they stand there, they living in the house, the lights is on, but the water is off.

[00:10:31] This is real stuff. You just think about it. We live in Flint and I don't know where you live, but I live in Flint. We still can't use our water. So a lot of this weighs on your mental health. Right. It weighs on your mental health. I have to drive past abandoned schools and houses with tarps on them. We have food desert, and by the time I get to where I'm going I'm mentally exhausted and drained.

[00:10:53] I'm, I'm depressed, right? So if I'm not incarcerated and I feel like that, I can only imagine how they feel when they're feel inadequate, when they come out and they don't have the support system. So I feel like when they don't have stuff set up for them and they're looking for jobs and they might be, you know, $5 away from committing a crime right to eat or whatever it is that they want, connect them to a grassroots organization.

[00:11:17] I think they can get all of that and people will build, you know they will want to pour into their development and they can build in on their skills and we can work at something together is what I think. 


[00:11:27] Marker
---

[00:11:27] , it's worse because the people who were sending us the resources, those resources have pretty much dried up. You know, they want, they want the nation to think that, oh, well they got good water now. Yeah. But the water's still going through nasty pipes, so we're not gonna drink the water.

[00:11:40] 'cause they have to go through the nasty pipes to get to me. So it makes no sense. 


[00:11:43] Marker
---

[00:11:43] General Motors pulled out. So Flint was a General Motors town.

[00:11:46] So when General Motors pulled out, I mean, we have a few factories, but this whole time was General Motors, right. So they moved out for a lot of different reasons. One of the reasons if you look at the research was because the water was rusting their brand new cars before they could sell 'em. So if the water was rusting their cars, why would you give it to the people to drink?

[00:12:03] So that was one of the reasons. Look it up, 


[00:12:05] Marker
---

[00:12:05] people want a better quality of life and those people who followed their jobs left right, who could follow the jobs or go somewhere else, they left. It took their family.

[00:12:14] They want a better quality of life. So when those people picked up and left, and then you know, like every 10 years we get the census. When you only have so many people here, the resources to keep those institutions open, you don't get that amount of money. That's why they always do that count. You know? I don't know if you have kids that are in school, that's why don't count day.

[00:12:31] They want everybody there. Well, it's the same thing with the census. They only do that every 10 years. So if your population is this for 10 years, you gotta deal with that amount of money. Now we could get a surge and get a lot of people come in right now, but we still gonna have that same small amount of money that was allocated from 2020.

[00:12:47] We're not gonna do it again until 2030. Yeah, 
