Kimberly Woodson
Link: https://vimeo.com/854538208
===

[00:00:00] . Hi, my name is Kimberly Woodson and I am a 53 year old mother of a five year old and a 35 year old.

[00:00:07] And my biggest concern as a Detroiter is the gentrification that's going on. Like I can't ride down three blocks and it's now all of a sudden suburbanized and. It's little bitty kids that can play differently in a cleaner street and a different environment. And I feel like what happens to my little brown baby in the future, because I know as a youth growing up in Detroit, I wasn't heard.

[00:00:40] It was like there was no protection for women and girls then, and it seemed to be no protection for women and girls now, like we just buried this baby all because her mother no longer wanted to be with a man in 2020. I had to bury my sister. Because she no longer wanted to be with her husband. It's an epidemic going on in society, and because most of the victims happen to be black and brown, it is not.

[00:01:14] , don't get me wrong, I am forever grateful that during Covid 19, that man's life was lost, and the response to the death. I will ever be grateful for all the people, like the Black Lives Matter, everything that grew out of that one death.

[00:01:33] It was like his name, a flood of . All these righteous, wonderful gifts


[00:01:38] Marker
---

[00:01:38] Women, where is our righteous indignity? They lock up mothers. And when you lock up a mom, you destroy a community. When you lock up a dad, you don't need to destroy a household. So it's like where is the protection for the women that are incarcerated are, are there because of direct action of a man or a dominant co-defendant who was forcing things on them.

[00:02:09] My fear is do I flee Detroit or Michigan because they don't see my baby? I. And they would never see her. Or do I stand and scream and shout and keep doing everything I feel is right, not for just myself and my daughter, but for my community. Do I still keep fighting to heal my community or do I throw in a towel and say, they're never gonna make me feel safe in Detroit because I'm not light enough.

[00:02:40] Because I'm not the right ethnicity, you know what I'm saying? So it's like the same things can happen to the black and brown women for forever. And the first time it happens to someone of another race, then all hell loose. And that's not fair. And this is my city and it's been predominantly black most of my 53 years.

[00:03:04] I'm sure it's been that way longer than that. So why is it that my resources, my cops, Can't come to my city block in a hurry like they do in all of the nice neighborhoods that they have now done since I've been home 2017. And when I first came home, I was devastated of my city, but now I see some improvement.

[00:03:28] I love the idea of the walk and the bike ride to be able to go from one city all the way downtown to the river walk. I love to show off the best of my city, but there is parts and nooks and nannies of the family of the city that the mayor and everybody else don't want people to see and know about.

[00:03:49] They need love too, and those are the spots that I care about the most. Those are the parts I do care about how my child is being educated in the Detroit public schools and their ratings. I do care about how people can want returning citizens to go show up to a Scared Straight thing to improve, prove they already feel bad, teenager or kids that's on a negative path behavior, but yet cannot allow a parent to volunteer and help.

[00:04:20] Actually infiltrate and make sure that those children aren't making the same mistake that they made. So it's like you don't hear the little African American girl, you silence her everywhere you can. You don't try to begin to get her the help she needs and the minute she mess up, she's locked up. I fear for my daughter, I fear for her.


[00:04:41] marker
---

[00:04:41] I want to leave Detroit like on the next thing. Smoking so bad. I can put the plan together. I'm outta here because I fear for my baby. I want her to go somewhere where she's just as included as everybody else that's around her. Do I have to go to a small hick town to do that? Where do I have to go that I feel like my African American baby girl will be seen, will be heard, and will be validated for all of her accomplishments and not have to work 10 times as hard as the other counterparts to see the same accomplishments and achievements and get the same rewards?

[00:05:20] Can she be safe? Can she call the cops just like somebody else can call the cops and get the same response? Do I have to move in a richer neighborhood for her to be able to get help? If somebody's breaking in just as quick as somebody else can get help in other neighborhoods, that's not fair. Why is that?

[00:05:39] And why is my taxes higher? Why is my insurance for my car higher? Why is my road the worst? I go in outstate. I drive around in outstate cities and I be like, Ooh, no bumps, no speed bumps. We definitely not in Detroit. That bothers me. Why is only certain parts of Detroit being beautified and the parts they care about the most?

[00:06:03] To my people That my baby may have to grow up in here. Not being invested into my taxes. Pay just like everybody else's. .


[00:06:11] Marker
---

[00:06:11] Domestic violence to me, like during covid 19. Everybody got to see the real people. The real monsters came out in the homes. People that was maybe able to go cheat with they girlfriends or whatever they was able to do, whatever extra release they was having was taking it all out on the people that was closest to them.

[00:06:37] And domestic violence was on an all time high and. So many people got killed during them couple of years, and it was no outcry for that. There was no like, I feel like just like we raised the roof and kicked over things and got indignant for George Floyd's death. We should have been just outright and indignant and hitting the streets for the very first wife or domestic violence victim that got killed in they home because they was trapped in there.

[00:07:14] Because the ' cause of Covid 19, it was like you have prosecutors , yes, domestic violence is on the rise, but yet, Nothing was being done. We were on a lockdown status. These people, the worst came out of the worst of people, and I feel there was so many lives lost that shouldn't have been lost, had society cared more, but because most of the victims.

[00:07:39] Normally be black and brown females, they don't start caring until it's in their community. Just like even the doctor who got killed by her spouse in Oakland County, she only was spoken on for a few times, and I feel like she only got as much publicity as she did is because she was from Oakland County and she had a predominant position in the they district.

[00:08:05] So, and that's only because had she just been another African American female, she wouldn't have got that much coverage. It would've been like a one liner, one story, and that's it.

[00:08:16] And I feel like that's not fair because hurt people, hurt people. And sometimes when you're trapped in a situation, You need avenues to get out and we don't allow victims enough space to feel safe enough to trust us as a society to be transparent enough to say, I need help. I'm not going to look you in the face and say, I'm in a domestic violence situation and I don't trust you enough to do something other than talk about me behind my back.


[00:08:48] Marker
---

[00:08:48] I feel mental health is the solution to every problem somebody has.

[00:08:52] If you can think it through and you got to have a clear head, and you gotta know if your thinking is thinking or if you got on the right path of thinking. And in order to do that, sometimes you need a, a. Professional to help you just be a soundboard. They don't really have to offer your opinion. 'cause most people be like, oh, I got, do people think I'm crazy if I go see a shrink or do this?

[00:09:15] No. You crazy to keep all that crazy. Thoughts that you not even sure you understand inside of you bottled up. It's gonna blow up one way or the other and the most unexpected time whatsoever. So you might as well try to get somebody that might be able to say, I've heard of something like this. Oh, you know, it's not that uncommon then you think.

[00:09:39] You know what I'm saying? Or somebody to be able to say, you cuckoo with cocoa puff. Yeah. You need another opinion. But I'd rather for somebody to tell me I'm crazy. Than not have the opportunity to do that. For domestic violence victims, I feel mental health would allow them to get out of that space of low self-esteem shame and all the plethora of, of negative anecdotes that comes with being in that setting.

[00:10:10] I think it would help them build enough confidence to do the self work that they need to come up out of that. Because you can remove a victim out of a situation, but if emotionally and mentally they still there, they gonna go back. I got to mentally and then emotionally prepare myself for the, for the exile before I actually make the exile, or I'm just gonna long for home again.

[00:10:34] Mental health should be offered to the victim as well as those who abuse people. I often feel that if my brother-in-law had got help, Real counseling that he could have seen that his way of love was not conducive to the marriage and they could have worked out him having anger issues or insecurity issues or whatever.

[00:11:00] 'cause I don't know exactly why it was he did what he did, and I'm not gonna pretend to predict it. I forgive him and I still love him and I, and it's not a day that go by that I don't wish I. That both of them was still here. And that's why I feel like mental health would have played, it would have saved my, their life.

[00:11:21] It would've truly saved

[00:11:23] their life. And. Even for like my family members, my loved ones, being able to seek counseling or probably save a whole lot of family. It's still a divide between the two families and it's gonna take everybody seeking.

[00:11:43] Mental health work and working on your emotions and your mental and coming to a terms of proper grieving and it just, you, you gotta work. That's traumatic stuff you can't deal with on your own. And I think a lot of people feel like they're weak if they see their friend get killed and don't go talk to nobody.

[00:12:07] That's not, most people don't see their friend get in front of them.


[00:12:12] Marker
---

[00:12:12] You don't want to bottle yourself inside yourself because you worried about what somebody may think of you. They definitely gonna think the worst of you if you mess around and explode. They definitely gonna think the worst of you is you in the McDonald's line and the person behind you bumped you one too many times and you turn around and just start sticking them with your EpiPen and they end up dying.

[00:12:38] And you wonder where did all that rage come from? Because you have so much bottle inside and you haven't talked to nobody and you haven't had an opportunity to release it because most people don't even do self care. So if you not doing mental health or self-care, you are a living, breathing, nuclear bomb waiting to go off, and you are going to destroy as many people around you when you explode that that you, you may not even want to, but you will destroy everything around you and it might just be the ones you love the most.

[00:13:12] Do you really think some of these spouses said, I'm gonna wake up today and I'm gonna kill my spouse and kill myself. Something clicked in that moment. Something clicked and they said, this is it no more. I know for a fact when my brother-in-law killed my sister, he walked out the they was at the gas station.

[00:13:31] I seen the video. He walked back to his car and he walked back to her car and on her and shot her. Something clicked in him. If he had intend on shooting her, he would've had the gun on him. When he was in her car, when he would've had it on him, he would've never sat in her car and talked if he was intend on killing her.

[00:13:50] So something clicked and mental health could have stopped that clicking. Mental health could have got his mental back on track where he could have seen things in a different perspective because I'm sure he must have felt like it was the end of everything. He had to feel like, I can't go past this point and I'm not.

[00:14:12] Okay. And we gotta get people to not go get to that point where they feel like they can't go past it. Because that's what suicides come in. That's what will people go off. And I'm just gonna have a a killing spree and I'm gonna try to make the cops kill me. ' cause they too afraid to kill they self. So yes, forget a stigma.

[00:14:32] I don't want nobody, I don't wanna be the five o'clock news, so I'd rather go to the shrink and let them shrink my little head than be the five o'clock news. 'cause I didn't embarrass my whole family. 


[00:14:43] Marker
---

[00:14:43] Detroit public schools get the. Bottom of the resources. I feel like, and this have a lot to do with gerrymandering, prison gerrymandering, it's like when you lock up our residents from Detroit, when you go to any prison outta all the prisons in Michigan, the higher the largest population they're gonna have is gonna be from Wayne County.

[00:15:04] In every prison, the largest amount of population is Wayne County. So if all of our residents is populating the, the prison system, when they do, they census, they count them in, like say for instance, Genesee County, or they count them in Ionia and that money and resources go to those schools. Mm-hmm. And it takes away from Detroit Public schools.

[00:15:30] But however, the babies of the incarcerated individuals that's are locked up in MDOC are going to those schools. So it's like you setting them up for the prison and school pipeline. Now, because the schools are shitty, they don't get as many resources as all the other schools. You don't pay the teachers as much as they need to be paid.

[00:15:53] And you. Cram their classrooms where they can't give our students as much of attention as they might need to excel to the best of their ability. And I feel like as suburban schools, the school ratio student to teacher ratio is not as bad. And the pay is better. And also the resources that the kids receive in those other suburban schools is much better than Detroit.

[00:16:20] And also they grade is higher. When you get the grading system, they're higher. So what can we do to make Detroit schools just as higher? Why can't we pull all these resources to pull all Michigan schools up I don't care where I stayed in Michigan. I feel like my child should get a top A grade education no matter where I live, whether it's Flint, whether it's Jackson, whether it is Lansing or Detroit.

[00:16:50] I want the same education level and I wanted to be the top grade. 

[00:16:54] \ I want her to have as much of a advantage as she can. Course I feel like I have a very bright young baby and I don't care. I'm now, I'm not bragging 'cause it's my baby. Mm-hmm. But I feel like she's exceptionally bright and I don't feel like she's being challenging all the ways that she can learn.

[00:17:12] . And I feel like other school districts. Incorporate more different styles of learning and because of lack of funding, I'm dyslexic and I learn differently, and I know it takes me longer to catch up to things since other people, but I catch it, but I also, maybe somehow I have to sing it to myself or I may have to see it, you know what I'm saying?

[00:17:38] Or somebody may have to read it, you know, or maybe hands on. It's different things that I have to learn, different techniques, so everybody is not a one way. Type learning for every subject. And I feel like because of the budget restraints, the teachers aren't allowed enough liberty to be to explore different ways of reaching their students.

[00:18:04] And even if they did, they don't have enough capacity to do that because they're overcrowded. And that would induce extra work, especially for Detroit. So I feel, I feel like if they have more resources, they can have more teachers or they can have a bigger school or something to be able to give every student the attention that they need.

[00:18:24] Yeah. And not say because they were a little slow, put 'em in special ed because you don't have to be in special ed just because you need to sing it to yourself to catch it. 


[00:18:33] Marker
---

[00:18:33] Technology is not my best friend at all. I, it sucks. I suck. And technology, t technology sucks. Technology's supposed to make your life convenient. Well, they should tell that to people that has been in prison because I did almost 30 years and so I didn't have the advantage of growing up and like every new thing that advanced that you learned and it became like I have.

[00:18:59] Three year olds that can do stuff better than me, and I got this wonderful job that I really enjoyed. I really love, love, love, and I'm going into that. When you tell somebody like, what's your weakness? I said, one of my biggest weaknesses was technology. Well, yet I still lost my job. Within months of being hired.

[00:19:21] And matter of fact, weeks before Christmas I was without a job because of technology, and I had somebody actually sitting there beside me every step of the way of proving every step helping me. And it's sad because they don't think about that. It's like, It's like almost like why recidivism even exists at this point.

[00:19:42] Because if you have somebody that's locked up for decades coming home and you don't give them no pre-training with any kind of technology, you are setting them up for failure. I'm good at what I do, but when it comes to inputting the things that I've done, I suck. It takes me longer to write a report.

[00:20:00] For one, one-on-one that I'm having. Then it burst. I, I could have 10 one-on-ones in the time it take me to do one report for one, one-on-one, because that's how bad I suck at trying to put stuff in the computer. I'm always messing it up. After they get a new something, like I'm on my sixteenth phone since I've been home because, and it always be human error.

[00:20:23] It never be like, maybe I've dropped a couple, two or three, but you know what I'm saying? Most of the time it was something that I did to the phone that was messed up and I had to get a replacement 'cause they couldn't fix it at the store. Like, we don't know what you did to this. 


[00:20:38] Marker
---

[00:20:38] But if we set up something in the Department of Corrections, it can be a dummy thing where it's only connected to like one database. Mm-hmm. Where they can like practice research and stuff. It can be like, we gonna hook this up to the legal library or something where they just practice.

[00:20:59] Using like Google or researching stuff, 

[00:21:03] be able to have the technology at least six months in advance because you can't go over something one or two times and get it in. Like most of the applications, it's online. I had people that was like, I was ready to go, hit every spot. I had my pens ready, I was going to fill out, and they was like, go online.

[00:21:25] Go online. And I was like, I don't even know what online is. You know, so it's like just even the terminology and the definitions will be awesome. . Something where it's a booklet or a free class that they can take upon leaving something that it can just be where we are investing in you because we know you're your future customers and we don't want you coming home not having a proper technology.

