Kimball Gaskins
Link: https://vimeo.com/851156703

===

[00:00:00] Returning citizen. I gave up 32 years of my life to the Michigan Department of Corrections. I returned home in 2017.

[00:00:09] , some of the challenges I faced did after returning was

[00:00:11] , getting a job, getting jobs. Because, people didn't wanna hire a felon. And then by me being gone for so long, they figured like it'd be hard for me to communicate with people learn different things, especially dealing with computers and things like that. I found a job, but. It wasn't a good paying job, but it paid up more or less.

[00:00:33] , they didn't wanna hire you in, that's one of the things I didn't like about the job. Contractor and not an. Not an employee, but they want you to pay the taxes. So I found that bit very frustrating because you get, so far, that's the only, that's as far as you can get.

[00:00:48] No one, you can't go no further and that's it. And by being a program, they don't offer you benefits or anything. 

[00:00:54] So I find that very frustrating. 

[00:00:57] , contract and work with the city, you in the program, you, you, they're not liable for you to be hurt on the job. You get hurt on the job. You have to have insurance, your own insurance. In order to help you sustain throughout your injury because like when I went on my I had to get knee replacement.

[00:01:16] And so when I filed with them, they say, well, you supposed to have insurance to cover that. We don't cover that. And I didn't know that. And insurance that, that I did get from them was life insurance. Myself, I bought that myself, but it was life insurance. It wasn't accident, I guess you would say accidental or accident insurance.

[00:01:34] . So that was, that's pretty rough on me now and recovering from surgery and it take a toll on you, and that, 

[00:01:42] and that plays into your it plays into your mental, because you already struggling out here, coming from where you came from and dealing with things you had to deal with in there. And then you come out here and you see a whole different world, 30 plus years. It's, it's a whole different world. And it, it is a struggle.

[00:01:59] It gets frustrating at times. You wonder if you got what it takes to keep going, to make it. You see people, a lot of people, I get a, I get a lot of calls from some of the men that I knew in prison at two or three o'clock in the morning, and no calls don't be nothing. They don't be nice. And they be looking for a way to understand what they going through.

[00:02:21] Is it any way that I can help 'em what they going through? But I'm going through it, but I'm, I'm getting help by helping them. So that's, that's, that's one part of it. And we didn't get that type of help that we needed. The mental, we didn't get to go see the psychiatrist and, and, and, and things like that when we were inside.

[00:02:38] You only got to do that when you finna go home. When they finna release you, they run you through a little program. Boom, boom, and that's it. You don't get the real.

[00:02:47] One-on-one or the classes that you need. And then when you get out here, they don't have that. So mental health is very important when dealing with prisoners that did an X amount of time because they be having problems. They have problems. And a lot of us, we've, before we went to prison, we had problems.

[00:03:04] But we, we couldn't put a finger on it, but we couldn't nail it. We didn't understand it. But then when we got to prison, some of us was able to understand our plight. , some of us was able to get a hold on ourself, so to speak. But when, like I say, when you get back out here to this, to the real world, we like to say it's a struggle so I believe that a lot of us need to have something done in the mental health department, We need help dealing with this stuff because mental health is very, very important when dealing with ex prisoners because it's a lot of things that could, that could trigger.

[00:03:41] A person and have a person go back to the same things that they was used to. And that'll hurt a lot of people. Hurt the community and hurt innocent people and even hurt they self as well. But you, you don't want that. You wanna be able to have a place they can go, someone they can talk to, someone where they can be assured.

[00:04:01] That someone care for 'em, that they're looking out for, looking out for their best interest. So I believe that's important. . 

[00:04:07] I know a lot of returning citizens. I and I talked to a lot of 'em, and we all had the same, basically the same problems.

[00:04:16] And if someone would just give us. Ear, maybe that'd be a difference of us making it or not making it so it's a struggle. 


[00:04:25] Marker
---

[00:04:25] . My wife I, I had family support and that's what helped me. Amongst everything else, but a lot of people don't have that.

[00:04:34] And those are the ones that you have to look out for. You have to say, it's gonna be all right. Let's look at it like this. Let's try this today. Maybe today it'll be a better day than yesterday, but remember, we are free now, so we have to free our mind. We have to free our minds. Let's work on the mind.

[00:04:54] I had support from my wife. My wife went and testified in front of the house in the Senate and changed the bill. From, it was a successive judge, couldn't, couldn't veto you from going in front of the board. So she, they, they, they got, that law changed and I was a recipient of, of the hundreds of people that was doing life in prison.

[00:05:12] And they changed that. And a lot of us was, was able to go in front of the board. The board saw fit that we had served enough time and we were, our record was up to par and things like that, and they, they said, okay, we're gonna give you a chance. And so in doing that, the percentage rate of recidivism has been lower.

[00:05:32] After that 20 years, you give that person chance and if they come back, Then they never wanted that chance. And then to each his own after that. That's what a lot of people in there like to say. 


[00:05:41] Marker
---

[00:05:41] Technology. It was, it was a, it was real tough because I didn't even know how to use the telephone.

[00:05:47] you pick up the telephone and they got all these numbers on it and, and saying, text this, do that. Email this return seeing who knows all that. And if you don't go to a class or got some granddaughters or babies that know this stuff, then you're in trouble. But, so I went to a class, I was able to get in the class, but then COVID came up, shut the class down.

[00:06:10] But the little that I learned from them at that time, it helped me. Then my granddaughters was able to assist me further because they kids are tech savvy. I was, I was blessed on that end to have that. But there's a lot of people don't have, they don't have the ability to go to a class because a class isn't offered, they should have. A class so that people can go to, not have to pay to go, you shouldn't have to pay to go. And they know that this is something that you're not able to do coming from where you came from. So they should have those classes already for you. Not like the little, like I say, they get, they did just, they crammed you in like a month before you finna go home with all this stuff

[00:06:52] 


[00:06:52] m
---

[00:06:52] You wanna be able to be independent. 'cause after so long being in, in that cage and, and everything is given to you all. Or, okay, let me learn something on my own and then let me go see if I'm capable of doing A, B, and C and then getting the desired result that I would like to have, 'cause then you can, you can learn how to, you can put your resume on there. you, you learn a lot of things which you can use it for, for good to assist you in elevating yourself, and that's real important.

[00:07:22] A lot of people don't get that and a lot of, and then that just takes them back to what they know. And we know they didn't know anything before that, and then you have people who will

[00:07:33] just go along with, just get along, but it is ripping them apart. It's ripping them apart inside and it's just, it's just a matter of time. It's just a matter of time for they turn to that ticking time bomb and they go off. You see it, you see it in the news nowadays, but it can, it, you can, you can help someone.

[00:07:51] Some people can be saved. 


[00:07:53] Marker
---

[00:07:53] Who knows about credit.

[00:07:54] We didn't know anything. You didn't even have a job when you was out here. So when you come go to credit, they say, who are you? Where have you been? You don't even register on a scale. Who, where are you? Where are you coming from? And then you have to explain to them all that and, and then that's a big thing people need to know about how to get credit.

[00:08:12] Not only just to get it, but to maintain it and use it properly. ' cause you'll find yourself. And a lot of debt

[00:08:18] and those stories are being told as well. 


[00:08:21] Marker
---

[00:08:21] I think that yeah, they should have a program where, like a small bank will afford you maybe say a thousand dollars and.

[00:08:31] Teach you how to maintain and not put a big amount of interest on it and allow you to, use your credit, understand your credit, and in that way you can, you can you can build your credit up without having to take all the They come along with it if you don't understand what's going on


[00:08:49] Marker
---

[00:08:49] Returning citizens coming straight out the door. Now, if you cut out and you do like 2, 3, 4 years or something like that, then you might find some people that'll deal with you from a different perspective.

[00:09:02] But coming straight out the gates, it's, it's tough. I know a lady that said she had to go live in an abandoned house and begin to renovate it because no one would let her. Get even an apartment because of her status. And she said once she got that house, the people finally came and said, Hey, this our house, you have to get out.

[00:09:20] So she said she took all the stuff down. She did and went and found her another house. And finally she found the house there. The person said, you did all this? She said, yes. They say, what, you can have a house. The person actually gave her the house. Now I don't know how many times that's gonna happen in life, but when they saw what she did to that house and they hadn't did nothing with it for years, they finally, they gave it to her.

[00:09:43] And I was like, well, we know that's not gonna happen to every, to everybody. So there it is there. We need another system for that. . 


[00:09:50] Marker
---

[00:09:50] A lot of people, they, they starting to have a lot of looks at prisoners. That's who changed? you could tell, you can, you could tell when a person came in prison how they was, they was ignorant. Ignorance not a bad word. 'cause you simply don't know. There's a responsibility for you to know.

[00:10:06] So you have to begin to know the things that you need to know in order to live a successful life. Live a crime free life. Live a life that you can be helpful to someone in some way, and then begin to uplift yourself and follow humanity. The people that need help out here.


[00:10:25] Marker
---

[00:10:25] I found out that a lot of organizations in the years I've been out, they do a lot of talk. They like to be in front of the press. They like the cameras, but when it get down to the real nitty gritty to go do the work, the work isn't being done in the, in the manner in which they're speaking.

[00:10:42] There's some, there's some groups out here that's, that's down here in the, as we say, in the dirt. That's down here in the dirt that gets the job done. But they don't have the support or the funding that some of the other groups get and some of the other groups that have the funding, they don't do no work.

[00:10:59] It's a facade, it's just for sure they got, it's all bravado.

[00:11:04] So we have. Find the, the groups that we have to get the groups together that's doing the work. ' cause the work only get done by those who does the work. I'm a firm believer in that.

[00:11:14] . Because that's very important for organization. ' cause you can fund so much and you can get so many donations from Walmart or Sam's Club or whatever and do this and that, but, You need, you just need,

[00:11:26] you need those big companies to come along and help instead of building up one area of the city, you have to build the whole city. 

[00:11:33] I listen to a lot of people and they talk a. Political stuff and I just listen to 'em. But I be, when they be talking about funding or defunding, I don't, you don't wanna defund the police department. That's not, that's not a good, I don't believe it's a good thing to do. However, if you're saying you're gonna take some money, then you should put the money in education.

[00:11:54] And if it's in education, that means educating everybody. Return to citizens as well. . That's very important. So if they, they say, we're gonna take some of this money and do this with it, then you should send it at the returning citizens, because these are the people that has to live next door to you, that you have said is ready to return to society and be a part of society, a contributor to society, and you don't want to help them.

[00:12:20] It doesn't make sense. 


[00:12:21] Marker
---

[00:12:21] Who was once on those same streets doing the same thing. Some of those people are headed towards that can say, Hey, I know this book. I wrote that book, and I'm telling you, you gonna write your name in that book and you don't want your name in that book. 

