Wendy Dorsey
Link: https://vimeo.com/856543515
===

[00:00:00] I grew up here in the seventies graduated from Central High School in 73.

[00:00:06] So if you figuring out my age. Yeah, I am. , when I was coming up in high school, we did not have access to. The technology that was, that was starting to come about that was something that you really didn't see. There were no cell phones pagers. CD players, USB cords, flash drives, none of those things were available.

[00:00:27] A lot of my technology learning was pretty much and is pretty much on hand hands-on, I should say. And just learning that. So from that, what I've experienced is that the seniors.

[00:00:39] People, a lot of people my age, maybe even older don't really know how to operate the new thing, the new technologies that are out there, my grandkids at four years old can operate, they can tell me stuff. They can show me stuff that's happening on my phone that I don't even know, and I'm paying the bill every month.


[00:00:57] Marker
---

[00:00:57] A lot of people. A generation under me and, and beneath that had that technology given to them in school. Now what I've been put before lately we, with meeting the organization Silent Cry and dealing with people that are returning citizens and finding out that a lot of these individuals had left here, left home when they were like as young as 13 years old.

[00:01:24] And coming home when they're like 50, 60 years old. So a lot of things that I got exposed to just from being out here in the world and having, having that opportunity to, to witness the new technologies and, and experience a lot of it myself. These individuals didn't from 13 to 40, 50, 60 years old.

[00:01:47] They come home and they're expected to, to get just engulfed in, in what's happening in the world right now. And they don't have any, any information on, on what, what a lot of this is. Even with cars, the cars that we have now, I have a car that. You don't even put a key into it. You just push a button in.

[00:02:09] It starts up and you don't even have a gear shift. You push a button and it shifts gears for you. Those technologies weren't around when these individuals left and left home, and now they're back and they're expected to know how to do this. Even with television.

[00:02:26] We, a lot of 'em, we didn't have cable at one time. If we didn't have cable and internet, So we just had an antenna and, and maybe a remote control. VCRs were out with, , the tapes that you put in, we had those were available, so now we don't even use those anymore. So your television is a smart tv.

[00:02:46] So you have to learn how to operate all these new things. 


[00:02:49] Marker
---

[00:02:49] They don't have the money. To be able to call them and put money on their, on their cell phones so they could make phone calls. And I remember early on when he was in, you would have to put money onto onto his books so that you can make a phone call and it would, if you put $20 on onto the book for him to make a call, the, the service would take, I think, up to about $5.

[00:03:13] Just a call. And then each call costs so much money per minute. So you're only making, if you're lucky, maybe you'll get two calls out of that $20. And a lot of these families, $20 is a lot of money. They don't have it to, to issue out like that. So, The contact with their families is, is very minimal. And then you have some of them.

[00:03:34] I know there's one young man that was working with Silent Cry agency. He went in when he was 13. He come out, he's 50 something years old, and all of his family have passed away. So he comes home and there's no family available to him. So it's, it was hard. Hard for him to adjust and it's still hard for him to adjust to living out here in the world.

[00:03:55] Very talented young man. Very, very gifted. He learned how to how to write papers for inmates and that kind of helped keep money coming in for him 'cause he would write letters and, and different, things that he would write for them to, to submit to courts. 

[00:04:12] And so he, he learned how to do all, all of those things. And and that's what he said, it, it kept him able to have funds to buy food and deodorant, toothpaste and stuff that a lot of us just take for granted. Here on outside and not having family available to help him out. He just found a way to survive in inside.

[00:04:31] So now he's out and he's doing the same thing, surviving ' cause there's no skills affordable to him. And then coming out with a felony, where do you work and where do you get loans and where do you find housing and. No family. So what do you do? And what I saw with a lot of, especially the men, is they get attached to a woman that they meet that correspondence or they come up and visit and they get paroled to that female, that woman.

[00:05:01] And while they're on probation for the few years, because they come out, even though they got out, they're still put on probation for a couple years. And if they mess up, On that probation, they go back. 


[00:05:13] Marker
---

[00:05:13] It's a different scenario, unfortunately, like with my nephew he got life.

[00:05:17] So but everyone that, that was locked up with him or out except for him, 'cause he wouldn't snitch. He wouldn't tell. So he's still locked up. But there was some flaws in his case that the family has an attorney that's been looking at it, but even with, with our family is everybody, , trying to chip in.

[00:05:37] It's expensive. It's still expensive. When you're talking about several thousand dollars at a time, that's gotta go for filing paperwork or for the attorney to look at the paperwork. And those are hours of of time. So it's been a few years that we did find an attorney that was willing to look at his case.

[00:05:55] 'cause he also happened to be an ex-offender who got out on a, on a technicality that happened in his case that he found. So he's using those skills. To help others that are, are locked up un unjustly or unfairly. So, but for, for families and for these young men and young women, there's a lot of women, a lot of women that have been locked up as teenagers and a lot of them, , for the crimes that they committed was, a lot of it was for self defense.

[00:06:25] 'cause of women, women get raped, they get beat, they get. Really put in bad situations to make them do things that they really don't wanna do, but it becomes a, a thing of survival for a lot of them. Or like one young, one young woman that she served 30 years in, she killed someone that was trying to rape her little sister, and I think she was, this, this lady was about 16.

[00:06:47] So her little sister was much younger, but she got out because she was a juvenile lifer.

[00:06:51] So it is, it's a, it's a real sad state of affairs in America. 

[00:06:57] , but a lot of these young people were released ' cause a lot of their cases were, were tried unfairly and unjustly for. 

[00:07:05] Well the young man that I was talking about, he killed his mother's boyfriend because his, he was abusive and he was only 13, but a child tried as an adult, and I think that's what the, the problem was, is that these people were were tried as, as adults and they were children. And not good representation. 

[00:07:23] You, you grow up fast, you learn how to survive. Whereas here, when you were out, you had your, your parents or your other family members that will help you maneuver through going into adulthood, , but they don't, they didn't get that.

[00:07:38] And, and the the staff inside doesn't become their parents at all. 


[00:07:44] Marker
---

[00:07:44] I'm really a big supporter with Silent Cry. And I, I try to get the, get the message out that these things are happening and have happened and that where awareness, awareness has to happen, that these things are going on and still going on, and especially with our children.

[00:08:00] It, it hasn't, it hasn't changed. Even though they did pass that law. Let all these people out, they're still, they're still incarcerating young people. , and people of color and people with less economic standards. They're, they're treated less than everybody else. So they get, they get used and, and, and put into situations that if you had the money or if you look different than me, you would probably get away or get out or get more help.

[00:08:28] And even once you, if you do and you come out and you look different than me, you probably would get more access to resources that will help you along the way. , it's still lopsided. It's still, it's still still got one leg, ? And then, and our system is still limping and it's still blind.

[00:08:46] The only thing we can do is that everybody, that I think, that everyone that, that has a, has a soul and, and want to see something happen, you don't really have to have a lot of money to, to try to make a difference. You just gotta have a, a ear and a heart to see a change. , sometimes all it takes is one person willing to just listen.

[00:09:06] Sometimes all it is is, is just a touch., a consoling touch that, that you're listening and you have compassion. You don't have to be what they call a sucker for stuff, but you just have true compassion and understanding as to what's happening with these people.


[00:09:22] Marker
---

[00:09:22] It's just that people, people just need support and compassion. 


[00:09:26] Marker
---

[00:09:26] the whole world knows that America locks up more than 50% of their African American population. . And they know that America is built on the idea of slavery, free labor when they're in prison, free labor. What they make? Some people, some of them, I think they increase the money now, I think they get like maybe $2 a day or something like that.

[00:09:50] And if you got a lot of the parents that are in there and their children are in the foster care system or on the welfare system, that money has to be paid back. They're gonna pay back that money on $2.

[00:10:02] It doesn't work. It doesn't work. So when they come out, if they come out, you got child support, you owe, you got restitution, you owe, you need to get a place, you need to get a car. How do you survive?

[00:10:15] And you're not supposed to go back into your old neighborhood. . So where do you go? Where do you go? Who's gonna take you to find out that, you're returning citizen? . Who's gonna do that? , so there, there's a lot of education that needs to happen to the general public.


[00:10:29] Marker
---

[00:10:29] no education. The, the schools, the schools in, in the poor neighborhoods, there are hardly any, , in the city of Detroit there's over 200 closed schools, 200.

[00:10:39] Where are these kids going to school? They gotta get up in the morning at five o'clock and get on the bus at 6 30, 7 o'clock to get bused. 10, 10, 20 miles away. And then you don't, they don't get back home until four or five o'clock in the evening.

[00:10:55] Who, who? What? And their parents probably aren't there 'cause they gotta work somewhere. They gotta work one, two jobs. So the kids are home by themselves. And then of course they're gonna get into stuff. Their friends are doing things, they're gonna do stuff, there's no supervision. And then they're going to a school in a community that don't want 'em in there.

[00:11:13] The schools, the school system, the public school systems aren't, aren't up to par like they should be. Then the kids are tired. They gotta get up if they get up and go, because after COVID, a lot of kids don't go anywhere. They, they still at home and they're behind. So what do you do? You do other things.

[00:11:31] 'cause you gotta eat, you gotta live somewhere. , mom don't have a lot of money. Grandma don't have a lot of money. Grandma don't, , she barely making it on, on $800. Social security check. If it's that much. She gotta feed these kids 'cause Mom is not around anymore. And after Covid, we lost a lot of people just from Covid.

[00:11:50] So what do you do?

[00:11:51] Like, what do you do? So the, the general public, the public at large needs to be more informed. They need to be willing to listen to what is really going on in their neighborhoods and in their communities. They need to really, really get more involved in, in speak out at city council meetings community, community meetings.

[00:12:13] They should have a school in their district. They should have. Grocery stores and things affordable to 'em that they can walk to. They should have busing a, a, a bus system. We don't have, a lot of 'em don't have that anymore. They just don't have it. When I was going to school, we just walked up the block.

[00:12:30] There was a school. It's not, and a lot of schools aren't there anymore, so the kids are so who's paying for that?

[00:12:36] There, there's a problem. So, and I, I think a lot of it lies at home. A lot of us at home, in our own communities, with our own families, with the neighbors, we need to, we need to be more in tuned and more involved. We need to. We really do need to take the blinders off and go do something. , when you sit back at home and you just peek out the window, 'cause you don't want to be involved and you don't wanna be a part of it, it doesn't solve anything.

[00:13:04] It's not gonna help you and it's not gonna help your your, your community. 

[00:13:08] And you do need to learn how to vote. It does work. It does work. Get involved. We have voices for a reason.

